                                                                                    WIS/03/13-APR-DPPA, UT-13-15, IPMU13-0081




                                                                Reading between the lines of
arXiv:1305.0318v5 [hep-th] 26 Dec 2022




                                                              four-dimensional gauge theories


                                                               Ofer Aharony1,2 , Nathan Seiberg2 and Yuji Tachikawa3

                                               1
                                                   Department of Particle Physics and Astrophysics, Weizmann Institute of Science,
                                                                               Rehovot 76100, Israel
                                          2
                                              School of Natural Sciences, Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, NJ, 08540, USA
                                         3
                                              Department of Physics, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan and
                                                            IPMU, University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Chiba 277-8583, Japan



                                         Starting with a choice of a gauge group in four dimensions, there is often freedom in
                                         the choice of magnetic and dyonic line operators. Different consistent choices of these
                                         operators correspond to distinct physical theories, with the same correlation functions of
                                         local operators in R4 . In some cases these choices are permuted by shifting the θ-angle
                                         by 2π. In other cases they are labeled by new discrete θ-like parameters. Using this
                                         understanding we gain new insight into the dynamics of four-dimensional gauge theories
                                         and their phases. The existence of these distinct theories clarifies a number of issues
                                         in electric/magnetic dualities of supersymmetric gauge theories, both for the conformal
                                         N = 4 theories and for the low-energy dualities of N = 1 theories.




                                         May 2013
1. Introduction

    In this paper we study the line operators in four-dimensional gauge theories. The
analysis of a gauge theory starts by choosing a Lie algebra g and a gauge group G. This
determines the allowed Wilson line operators in the theory – they are in one to one corre-
spondence with the representations of G. Below we will analyze the consistency conditions
on the magnetic and dyonic line operators. Typically there are several distinct choices for
the same G. These different choices correspond to distinct physical theories.
    In some cases (like G = SU (N )/ZN ) these different choices can be labeled by extend-
ing the range of the θ-angle – the different theories are permuted by shifting the θ-angle
by 2π. In other cases (like G = SO(N ) with N > 4) the distinct choices are labeled by
new discrete θ-like parameters.
    The correlation functions of local operators in R4 depend only on the choice of the
Lie algebra g of the gauge group G. They are independent of the global structure of G
and the different choices of line operators. So naively these subtleties are of no interest
for a four-dimensional physicist. However, we will argue that they have several important
consequences. First, these subtleties affect the correlation functions of line operators in
the theory. Therefore, they affect the phase structure of the theory on R4 . Second, these
subtleties become more dramatic when we compactify the theory. For example, we will see
that the choices of G and of these parameters have important consequences even for local
dynamics on R3 × S1 . In particular, these different theories can have a different number of
vacua (and, in supersymmetric theories, different Witten indices) on R3 × S1 . The simple
reason for the difference between R4 and R3 × S1 is that wrapping a line operator around
the S1 leads to a local operator in R3 . These issues play an important role in the relation
between IR dualities of four dimensional gauge theories and those of three dimensional
gauge theories [1].
    Using this understanding, we revisit a number of issues associated with elec-
tric/magnetic duality in four dimensions. In particular, starting with some N = 4 su-
persymmetric Yang-Mills (SYM) theory, we can vary its coupling constant and look for
various dual weak coupling limits. We will show that in some situations we uncover dis-
tinct theories that have so far been viewed as identical. Similarly, a number of phenomena
involving the IR duality of N = 1 supersymmetric gauge theories [2,3] will be clarified.
Specifically, the duality of SO(N ) gauge theories with Nf vectors turns out to be partic-
ularly rich and interesting.

                                             1
    In this rather extensive introduction, we will use gauge theories with gauge algebra
su(2) as examples to illustrate the main features of our discussions. The following sections
contain the generalization of our analysis to other gauge groups.

1.1. The line operators

    Let us begin by analyzing the line operators. Consider a four dimensional gauge theory
based on the Lie algebra g and the gauge group G. We will only discuss connected gauge
                                                                            e and the
groups in this paper. We denote the universal cover of the gauge group G by G,
          e by C. The gauge group is the quotient G = G/H,
center of G                                           e    with H ⊂ C a subgroup of
the center. We will refer to these groups as electric groups.
    For a given gauge algebra g, the choice of the gauge group G determines some of the
properties of the gauge theory:
 1. The allowed matter fields must be in representations of G; i.e. they should be invariant
    under H. Note that the allowed representations are determined by G rather than the
    other way around. In particular, if H is nontrivial, a theory based on G differs from
                      e even if no matter fields are present.
    a theory based on G,
 2. The Wilson line observables are labeled by representations of G; i.e. they should be
    invariant under H. Unlike the choice of matter fields, the Wilson line representations
    include all representations of G, regardless of whether dynamical matter fields in these
    representations are present. In terms of the weight lattice Λw of g, the Wilson lines are
    in one to one correspondence with points in ΛG            G
                                                 w /W, where Λw ⊂ Λw is the sublattice
    of weights of G, and W is the Weyl group.
 3. The gauge bundles we should sum over are also affected by the choice of G. The
                                                                           e the different
    bundles are labeled by certain discrete choices. If the gauge group is G,
    bundles are labeled by the instanton number ℓ ∈ Z. If the gauge group is G, there
                                                             e bundles. For these, the
    are additional distinct bundles – G bundles that are not G
    instanton number ℓ can be rational rather than integer. One parameter that labels
    distinct theories with the same gauge group G is the θ-angle, which determines how
    to sum the contributions of the bundles with various values of ℓ. Their weights are
                                           e then the periodicity of θ is 2π. Otherwise it
    the phase eiℓθ . If the gauge group is G
    can be larger. Below we will consider additional characteristics of the bundles such as
    their Stiefel-Whitney classes w2 and w4 , and we will show that the sum over different
    bundles can lead to new discrete θ-like parameters, that distinguish between distinct
    theories with the same gauge group G.

                                             2
    In addition to the Wilson line operators, there are also ’t Hooft line operators. Let us
denote by g∗ the Langlands-dual (GNO-dual [4]) Lie algebra of g, and by G    e∗ the simply-
connected group with Lie algebra g∗ . Then, ’t Hooft lines are labeled by points in Λmw /W,
where Λmw is the magnetic weight lattice, i.e. the weight lattice of g∗ , which is the dual
of the root lattice of g. More generally, we can have dyonic line operators carrying both
electric and magnetic charges. They are labeled by a pair of weights [5]

                                      (λe , λm ) ∈ Λw × Λmw                                    (1.1)

with the identification
                              (λe , λm ) ∼ (wλe , wλm ),      w∈W                              (1.2)

where W is the Weyl group both of g and g∗ , and it acts on the two lattices in (1.1). This
labeling contains more information than a pair of representations of g and g∗ , which are
labeled by (Λw /W) × (Λmw /W) [5].
                               e
     Given the gauge group G = G/H, which line operators labeled by (λe , λm ) are present
in the theory? First, when the gauge group is G we should include all lines (λe , 0) with
λe ∈ ΛG
      w /W. In particular, the lines (re , 0), with re a root, should be present. They
represent the world lines of gauge fields. Similarly, the purely magnetic lines (λe = 0, rm )
with rm a root of g∗ must be present. Furthermore, if (λe , λm ) and (λ′e , λ′m ) are present,
then so is (λe + λ′e , λm + λ′m ) 1 . Also, if (λe , λm ) is present, then so is the orientation-
reversed line (−λe , −λm ).
      Therefore, we can consider the charges (λe , λm ) modulo the root lattice of g × g∗ .
Recalling that the weight lattice modulo the root lattice of the algebra g is the center C
              e and that G
of the group G,            e and G e∗ have the same center, we see that we can organize
the line operators into classes labeled by a pair2 (ze , zm ) ∈ C × C. The properties above
imply that if one element in a class exists, so do all the elements (λe , λm ) in that class.
And, the allowed classes should be closed under multiplication and inversion.
      As we mentioned above, the choice of a gauge group G implies that the lines (λe , 0)
with λe ∈ ΛG
           w /W a weight of the group G should be present. This means that we should
include all classes (ze , zm = 0), where the ze are the center charges that are invariant under

  1
      This is related to the operator product expansion of line operators, discussed in [6].
  2
      Throughout our discussion we will carelessly ignore the distinction between elements of an
Abelian discrete group and the characters of that group.

                                                  3
  H. A crucial point is that even after this choice is made, there are still distinct theories,
  labeled by the complete choice of classes of allowed line operators (ze , zm ) [7].
         The allowed choices for which line operators are present are restricted by a version
  of the Dirac quantization condition [5,7]. The correlation function of two lines γ and γ ′
  should depend only on the positions and representations of γ and γ ′ . If we hold γ fixed, and
  move the path γ ′ such that it loops around γ (along a surface that has nontrivial linking
  number with γ) and then comes back to the same position, then the correlation function
  is multiplied by a phase. For the correlation function to be well-defined, this phase must
  be equal to one. This phase depends on the charges (ze , zm ) and (ze′ , zm
                                                                            ′
                                                                              ) of the two lines
  as follows. Let us consider the case when C = Zk ; the case of C = Z2 × Z2 will be treated
  in section 5, and the general case in section 6.3. For C = Zk the representations of lines
  are specified by
                                      (ze , zm ) = (n, m) mod k .                                  (1.3)

  Then, the condition that there is no nontrivial phase as the family of curves γ ′ links γ once
  is given by
                                        nm′ − mn′ = 0 mod k .                                      (1.4)

  This condition guarantees that the correlation functions of line operators are local3 .


  1.2. Example: the line operators for g = su(2)

         As a first example, consider gauge theories based on the Lie algebra g = su(2), with
  center C = Z2 . Let us first consider the simply-connected case:
SU (2) Here, the spectrum of operators includes Wilson lines in the fundamental representa-
         tion (λe , λm ) = (1, 0), or (ze , zm ) = (1, 0). Locality determines the remaining lines to
         be (λe , λm ) with λe ∈ Z, λm ∈ 2Z, so no other nontrivial representations of the center
         are allowed.
  Let us instead start with the electric gauge group G = SO(3). The purely electric lines
  are now (λe , λm = 0) with λe ∈ 2Z. This set of lines can be completed in two different
  ways, leading to two distinct theories [7]:

     3
         Similar conditions are present also for field theories with no known Lagrangian, such as the
  so-called class S theories, where the line operators still have a similar classification [8,7]. We will
  not discuss such theories here.

                                                    4
SO(3)+ Here the line operators are (λe , λm ) with λe ∈ 2Z, λm ∈ Z. In other words, they
          have (ze , zm ) = (0, 0) or (ze , zm ) = (0, 1), including the ’t Hooft line operator in the
          fundamental representation of the dual gauge group.
SO(3)− Here the line operators are (λe , λm ) with λe , λm ∈ Z such that λe + λm ∈ 2Z; they
          have (ze , zm ) = (0, 0) or (ze , zm ) = (1, 1). In particular, the purely electric line (1, 0)
          and the purely magnetic line (0, 1) are not present, but the dyonic line (1, 1) is present.




                    SU (2)                       SO(3)+                        SO(3)−

             Figure 1: The weights of line operators of gauge theories with g = su(2).


    The weights of the available line operators of the three choices, SU (2) and SO(3)± , are
    shown in Figure 1. There, the horizontal axis is for λe and the vertical axis is for λm . The
    shaded regions in the figure give the Z2 charges.
          We presented the two SO(3) theories through their different line operators. Alterna-
    tively, they can be described by shifting θ by 2π :

                                          SO(3)θ+ = SO(3)θ+2π
                                                         −    .                                    (1.5)

    Indeed, the Witten effect shows that under θ → θ + 2π, (λe , λm ) → (λe + λm , λm ), which
    leads to (1.5). This means that when G = SO(3) the periodicity of θ is 4π. This is due
    to the fact that on spin manifolds4 , the instanton number of SO(3) gauge theories is a
    multiple of 12 . Naively, the shift of θ by 2π does not change the local physics. But since the
    insertion of the line operators in R4 creates a nontrivial topology, it allows us to distinguish
    θ from θ + 2π locally on R4 . Note that the insertion of lines in R4 keeps it a spin manifold,
    and therefore shifting θ by 4π maps the theory to itself, relabeling the line operators.
          As we will see amply below, we cannot always map one choice of line operators to
    another by a shift of the conventional θ-angle. For example, in section 3 we will see that
    SO(N )+ and SO(N )− are not related by a shift of the θ-angle when N ≥ 5.

      4
          On non-spin manifolds there can be “quarter instantons” and the periodicity of θ is 8π.

                                                      5
1.3. Analogies with 2d orbifolds and other constructions

      The discussion so far is reminiscent of orbifolds in two-dimensional field theories.
There we start with a system with a global discrete symmetry Γ. The orbifold is con-
structed by turning Γ into a gauge symmetry. This has the effect of projecting on the
Γ-invariant states and adding the twisted sector states. This is similar to our discussion
above. Starting with a gauge theory based on the simply connected group G      e we have
                                                                       e
Wilson lines for all representations of g. When the gauge group is G = G/H we project
on Wilson lines associated with representations that are invariant under H. The various
magnetic and dyonic lines are similar to the twisted sector states. The set of allowed oper-
ators in the orbifold is restricted by mutual locality. This is analogous to the use of Dirac
quantization on the lines. In two dimensions the need to add the twisted sector states
follows from modular invariance. In four dimensions we will also argue that the spectrum
of line operators should be complete, including a maximal set of allowed charges5 . Finally,
it is common in orbifolds that the details of the twisted sector can depend on additional
data – discrete torsion [9,10]. This is analogous to our different distinct theories with the
same gauge group G. We will see in section 6 that the choice of the line operators of four-
dimensional gauge theories corresponds to a phase in the path integral that is very similar
to the one that distinguishes theories with discrete torsion. The analogy with orbifolds
becomes more complete in sections 6.1 and 6.4. Just as orbifolds correspond to gauging Γ,
we will show that by gauging an appropriate symmetry we can move between our different
theories.
      Unlike two-dimensional orbifolds, our different theories with the same gauge algebra
g have the same local operators, and they differ only in their line and surface operators.
Similar phenomena were described in [11,12] (see also [13-15]). The phenomena described
in these papers have two complementary descriptions. First, it is a modification of the
sum over different bundles. Second, it is equivalent to coupling a quantum field theory
to a discrete gauge symmetry. The latter symmetry can be an ordinary gauge symmetry
whose holonomies are associated with lines, or it can be a higher form symmetry whose
holonomies are associated with surfaces or higher dimensional generalizations of them. Our
discussion in section 6.4 will make the analogy clearer by presenting our construction in
terms of gauging and correspondingly, there will be holonomies on lines and surfaces.
  5
      For example, in our su(2) example above, this means that we cannot have a theory with only
the (ze = 0, zm = 0) line operators.

                                               6
1.4. The classification of phases of gauge theories

    Now let us come back to the study of four-dimensional gauge theories. It is standard
to characterize the phases of gauge theories using the expectation values of line operators.
Let us start by discussing a situation when the theory has a mass gap; i.e. there are no
massless excitations above the ground state. If the gauge group is simply connected and
all Wilson lines are present, a Higgs phase is characterized by the fact that the expectation
values of all the Wilson lines exhibit a perimeter law. If some Wilson lines have an area
law, we say that the theory is confining.
                                e
     If the gauge group is G = G/H    with a nontrivial H, then some Wilson lines are not
present, and therefore we have fewer diagnostics of electric confinement. But in that case
we can use the magnetic and dyonic lines we discussed above to characterize the phases.
    As above, we label the lines by their classes (ze , zm ) ∈ C × C, where C is the center
   e Clearly, all the lines in a given class have the same behavior, area law or perimeter
of G.
law. We refer to a class with an area law as confined. It is straightforward to multiply
these lines. If (ze , zm ) and (ze′ , zm
                                       ′
                                         ) are not confined, i.e. they have a perimeter law, then
                                                             ′
so does their product. If (ze , zm ) is confined and (ze′ , zm ) is not, then their product is
confined. But the product of two confined classes might not be confined. For example, the
fundamental Wilson line in an SU (N ) pure gauge theory is confined, but its N -th power
is not. (More subtle examples, where the t-th power of this Wilson line is not confined,
where t is a divisor of N , were studied in [16,17].)
    It is often the case that the long distance dynamics involves a topological theory.
For example, the theory could be gapped, but there may be an unbroken discrete gauge
symmetry at long distance. One way this can happen is when the original gauge group G is
Higgsed, but an unbroken discrete subgroup remains unbroken. Another possibility, which
we will demonstrate shortly, is of an unbroken discrete gauge group of magnetic degrees
of freedom. A discrete gauge theory (see [12] for a recent review) with gauge group Zk
has Wilson line operators and surface operators carrying charges n = 0, · · · , k − 1. As we
will see, some of the line operators that have a perimeter law become Wilson lines of this
discrete gauge group at long distances.
    There are also various Coulomb phases. They can be ordinary Coulomb, free electric
and free magnetic phases (see e.g. [18]). These phases can be easily incorporated into our
discussion, but we will not do it here. Additional characteristics of phases were discussed
in [16], but we will not pursue them here.

                                               7
1.5. The phases of N = 1 SYM theories with g = su(2)

    Let us demonstrate this general discussion in the dynamics of N = 1 supersymmetric
pure gauge su(2) theories. These theories are characterized by the complex instanton
factor
                                                       2
                                                 − 8π2 +iθ
                                   η = Λ6 ∼ e      g         ,                         (1.6)

where g is the Yang-Mills coupling constant (evaluated at a scale which we have set to
one), and θ is the θ-angle. Classically the theory has a U (1)R symmetry under which the
gauginos λ are charged, but in the quantum theory this is broken to a discrete subgroup
by an anomaly.
    The theory with G = SU (2) has two vacua, in which the discrete Z4 global R-
symmetry is spontaneously broken to Z2 . These vacua are characterized by the vacuum
expectation value (VEV) of the gaugino bilinear,
                                                       1
                                       hλλi = ±η 2 .                                   (1.7)

It is clear from this expression that the two vacua are exchanged under θ → θ + 2π (which
is equivalent to the Z4 global symmetry transformation). When this theory is obtained
via a mass deformation of the N = 2 pure SYM theory, these two vacua arise from the
condensation of a magnetic monopole or a dyon [19], and hence the Wilson line in the
fundamental representation (and all lines with (ze , zm ) = (1, 0)) exhibits confinement in
both vacua.
    How does this story change in the theory with G = SO(3)? First, in this theory we no
longer have the Z4 global symmetry, which is associated with the shift θ → θ +2π. Instead,
the anomaly free R-symmetry is a Z2 symmetry, associated with shifting θ → θ + 4π.
This symmetry (taking λ → −λ) is part of the Lorentz group, given by a 2π rotation in
spacetime. Second, it is clear that the theory still has the same two vacua as the SU (2)
theory, but since these two vacua are related by θ → θ+2π, they are now inequivalent. The
difference between the two vacua can be seen by probing the behavior of the line operators.
The SO(3)+ theory has purely magnetic line operators with charge (λe , λm ) = (0, 1). In
one of the two vacua dyons condense. Since they have both electric and magnetic charges,
these ’t Hooft lines have an area law – they are confined. In the other vacuum, the
condensed particles are purely magnetic. Hence the same line operators have a perimeter
law. In fact, the charge of the condensed monopole is twice that of the loop operator, and
is given by (λe , λm ) = (0, 2). Therefore, at low energy we find in this vacuum an unbroken

                                             8
Z2 gauge theory, acting by ±1 on the magnetic line with charge (λe , λm ) = (0, 1) (or, more
generally, on all lines with (ze , zm ) = (0, 1)). This is an explicit example of our comment
above about an unbroken discrete gauge symmetry which appears out of the magnetic
degrees of freedom. The situation is similar in the SO(3)− theory, except that the two
vacua are exchanged.

1.6. Non-supersymmetric pure Yang-Mills theories with g = su(2)

    We can perform an analogous analysis also for the non-supersymmetric pure gauge
theory with gauge groups SU (2) or SO(3). One way to obtain this theory is by adding a
gluino mass mg to the N = 1 supersymmetric theory discussed above, which generically
splits the two vacua, and taking the limit of large |mg |. Consider first the case |mg | ≪ |Λ|.
Since we have a mass gap, the dynamics in each vacuum is essentially the same as above,
                                                                      1
and their vacuum energy is a positive number times ± Re(mg η 2 ) [20,21]. Thus, in the
(unique) vacuum of the resulting theory, the SU (2) theory confines (exhibits an area law
for its nontrivial line operator), while (depending on the phase of mg and on the value of
the θ-angle) one of the SO(3) theories has a perimeter law for its nontrivial line operator,
with an unbroken Z2 gauge symmetry, while the other SO(3) has an area law. In the
SO(3) gauge theory the θ-angle still has periodicity 4π, such that the two theories (and
the two low-energy behaviors) are exchanged by θ → θ + 2π.
    We conjecture that the same picture holds also in the limit of large mg , where we
obtain the pure non-supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory. We do not know how to prove
this, since there may be phase transitions as a function of mg /Λ. However, let us assume
that the standard picture of SU (2) dynamics is correct, namely that the pure SU (2) theory
confines (the minimal Wilson line exhibits an area law), and that there is no remaining
low-energy discrete gauge symmetry in this case (which seems plausible). Moreover, let
us assume that confinement arises from the condensation of some magnetically charged
particles (which may or may not carry also some electric charge). Since this condensation
is a local phenomenon, it should be the same in the SU (2) and SO(3) theories; in particular
both the electric and magnetic charges of the condensing particles must be roots of su(2).
The assumption that there is no remaining low-energy discrete symmetry in SU (2) implies
that the minimal charge of a condensing particle is not a multiple of any lower charge in the
root lattice. However, the form of the charge lattice implies that this charge should either
be two times one of the charges of the line operators in the class (ze , zm ) = (0, 1), or two
times that of one of the line operators in the class (ze , zm ) = (1, 1). Thus, either the SO(3)+

                                               9
theory exhibits a perimeter law for its nontrivial line operator and an unbroken Z2 gauge
symmetry, and the SO(3)− theory exhibits an area law for its nontrivial line operator,
or the other way around. Generically we would expect to get one type of behavior for
|θ| < π, and the opposite behavior for π < |θ| < 2π. Using the results of the next sections,
there are straightforward generalizations of this picture to general SO(N ) and SU (N )/Zk
groups.
    The distinction between gapped phases of theories with g = su(2) is sometimes loosely
phrased as a distinction between confining phases, where a monopole condenses, and
“obliquely confining” phases, where a dyon condenses [22]. Our discussion above im-
plies a somewhat different distinction. For G = SU (2) one can identify confinement, but
one cannot distinguish different confining phases. For G = SO(3) there is no good order
parameter for confinement. In this case there are two distinct phases, one with a perime-
ter law for the “disorder” line operator and an unbroken Z2 discrete gauge symmetry, and
one with an area law. However, the relation between this distinction and the traditional
distinction between confining phases is different in SO(3)+ and in SO(3)− , and in any
case a local observer cannot tell which of these theories she has (due to (1.5)). We suggest
that, as in the Higgs/confinement characterization [23,24], the proper distinction between
phases should use the behavior of the non-trivial line operators, rather than the identity
of the condensed particles. Furthermore, one should use only the lines that exist in the
theory.

1.7. Compactification on S1

    Our discussion also has important consequences when the theory is placed on R3 × S1 .
The N = 1 supersymmetric pure SU (2) theory has two vacua in four dimensions, and
continues to have two vacua in the compactified theory [25]. However, this is not the case
in the SO(3)± theories. The vacuum with the area law is fully gapped and remains a
vacuum in the compactified theory. But the vacuum with the unbroken Z2 gauge theory
is split to two vacua in the compactified theory. These two vacua differ by the expectation
value of the Z2 “Wilson line” wrapping the S1 in the low energy theory. This line is the
nontrivial line operator of the microscopic SO(3) theory. This is an explicit example of the
phenomenon mentioned above, that the number of supersymmetric vacua on R3 × S1 (and
also the Witten index) depends on the global properties. More details about this splitting
of vacua will appear in [1].

                                            10
1.8. Outline

    The rest of the paper is split into two parts. In sections 2-5, we generalize the dis-
cussions so far about g = su(2) to other gauge groups, and analyze the consequences
for dualities of supersymmetric gauge theories. We provide ample examples to illustrate
the analysis. Theories with g = E6 , E7 behave almost exactly the same as those with
g = su(3), su(2), respectively, so we do not analyze these cases separately. In section 6,
we will re-analyze our problem from the point of view of the Euclidean path integrals.
These two parts can be read almost separately.
    More detailed contents of the paper are as follows. In section 2, we discuss the lines
and the dynamics of gauge theories with g = su(N ). When G = SU (N )/ZN , we see that
the different choices of line operators are permuted by θ → θ + 2π. However, this is not
the case for general SU (N )/Zk groups. We discuss the properties of the N confined vacua
of the N = 1 SYM theory, and the S-duality properties of the N = 4 SYM theory.
    In section 3, we similarly discuss the properties of gauge theories with G = Spin(N )
and G = SO(N ). We see that with N ≥ 5 there is a choice of line operators which cannot
be obtained from the naive one by a shift of the standard θ-angle, and we discuss the
implications for the pure N = 1 SYM theory, and for the IR duality of SQCD theories.
    In section 4, we work out the properties of gauge theories with g = sp(N ). We find
the theories we denote by G = Sp(N ), G = (Sp(N )/Z2 )+ and G = (Sp(N )/Z2 )− . We
discuss N = 4 theories with these gauge groups and their S-duality properties, and in
particular how they map to N = 4 theories with g = so(2N + 1).
    In section 5 we study the peculiarities of theories with g = so(N ) with even N . In
this case, the choices N = 4d + 2, N = 8d, and N = 8d + 4 give rise to slightly different
behaviors.
    In section 6, we show how these choices of line operators can be seen from the point of
view of the Euclidean path integral. We see that there are discrete analogues of θ-angles
which we can add to the Lagrangian, which reproduce the possible mutually-local sets of
line operators. We also indicate how the analysis in the previous sections can be generalized
to product gauge algebras. Finally, we study the surface operators associated to the center
and to π1 of the gauge group, and discuss how the different theories we discuss (including
theories with the same algebra but different gauge groups) may be related by coupling
them to discrete Zk gauge theories.

                                             11
2. su(N ) gauge theories

     Let us start by considering gauge theories with gauge algebra g = su(N ). Here the
center is C = ZN , so the possible gauge group is G = SU (N )/H with H ⊂ C = ZN ,
namely H = Zk with k a divisor of N . If the gauge group is SU (N ), the allowed purely
electric line operators are in (ze , zm ) = (n, 0) with arbitrary n = 0, · · · , N − 1. Clearly,
the locality condition (1.4) shows that all the line operators are in these classes. In other
words, all the magnetically charged lines must be associated with the magnetic root lattice.
The situation is more interesting when H is nontrivial. We study various choices of H in
turn.

2.1. SU (N )/ZN

     Consider first the special case H = C = ZN . Now the purely electric line operators
must be in (ze , zm ) = (0, 0), and additional classes of line operators are possible.




        (SU (4)/Z4 )0         (SU (4)/Z4 )1         (SU (4)/Z4 )2          (SU (4)/Z4 )3

        Figure 2: The Z4 charges of line operators in the theories (SU (4)/Z4 )0,1,2,3.


     If N is prime, every operator with zm 6= 0 can be raised to a power to find an operator
with zm = 1. So, without loss of generality, we can assume that a line with (ze , zm ) = (n, 1)
exists. Any other line (ze , zm ) = (n′ , 1) with n′ 6= n then does not satisfy (1.4), and cannot
be present. Multiplying the operators in (ze , zm ) = (n, 1) leads to operators in the set

                              Ln = {(ze , zm ) = (nm, m) mod N }                           (2.1)

with m = 0, 1, · · · , N − 1. Clearly, no other classes of operators can exist. Hence, for every
n = 0, 1, · · · , N − 1 we have a distinct theory (SU (N )/ZN )n , whose line operators have
charges in Ln given by (2.1). This generalizes the case of SO(3) = SU (2)/Z2 that we
discussed above. The charges of line operators of (SU (4)/Z4 )0,1,2,3 are shown in Figure 2
to illustrate the lattices Ln .

                                               12
      If N is not prime, the sets Ln of line operators are still valid choices, but are there
additional possibilities? For example, for N = 4 we can also have a theory with line
operators in the classes
                                   (ze , zm ) = (0, 0),   (0, 2) .                          (2.2)

But we can still add to this list additional line operators without violating mutual locality.
In a consistent quantum field theory, the set of line operators has to be maximal and
complete.6 Then, if the gauge group is really SU (N )/ZN so that no lines (ze 6= 0, zm = 0)
are present, there is necessarily a line operator with zm = 1. We conclude that even for
N that is not prime, the only theories whose gauge group is precisely G = SU (N )/ZN are
the ones with line operators in one of the sets Ln (2.1).
      The N distinct theories that we found have an interesting relation to the θ parameter.
Because of the Witten effect, the electric charges of magnetically charged particles are
shifted as a function of θ. In our case, the electric weight λe is shifted by (see [26])

                                         λe → λe + λm ,                                     (2.3)

when θ → θ + 2π. In terms of our labels with (ze , zm ) this means that

                                         ze → ze + zm .                                     (2.4)

In the SU (N )/ZN theories, the sets Ln of operators (2.1) are transformed as Ln → Ln+1 .
      We see that the shift of θ by 2π does not permute the operators in a given
(SU (N )/ZN )n theory. Instead, it permutes the different theories. We can label the dis-
tinct theories by θ ∈ [0, 2π) and n = 0, · · · , N − 1 as above, or equivalently, we can label
them by θ ∈ [0, 2πN )

                        (SU (N )/ZN )θ+2π
                                     n    = (SU (N )/ZN )θ(n+1) mod N .                     (2.5)

      The fact that the SU (N )/ZN theory has an extended range of θ is known [27], and it
is associated with the existence of SU (N )/ZN bundles on spin manifolds with fractional
instanton number ℓ ∈ N1 Z. But it is usually dismissed as a subtlety that is present only
when the theory is placed on compact spaces. Now we see that this extended range of θ
can be detected even when the theory is formulated on R4 (see also [7]). The spectrum of
line operators in the theory detects this subtlety.
  6
     Such a completeness requirement is familiar in two-dimensional field theory, and it often
follows from imposing modular invariance. Similarly, our discussion of the Euclidean path integral
in section 6 implies that if we put a theory with a non-maximal spectrum of line operators on T4 ,
it would not be invariant under modular transformations of T4 .

                                                 13
2.2. Dynamics in pure N = 1 SYM theories with gauge groups SU (N ) and SU (N )/ZN

    This understanding of the line operators has significant consequences for the dynamics
of the theory. For concreteness, consider the N = 1 pure SYM theory. The SU (N ) theory
has a discrete Z2N R-symmetry acting on the gauginos, generated by γ, γ 2N = 1, which
is associated with a shift of θ by 2π. The generator γ N is also in the Lorentz group – it is
a 2π rotation. The theory is characterized by the complex instanton factor
                                                        2
                                                  − 8π2 +iθ
                                   η = Λ3N ∼ e      g         .                          (2.6)

The quantum theory has N vacua, associated with the spontaneous breaking of the global
Z2N symmetry to Z2 . They are characterized by
                                                     1
                                       hλλi = ǫN η N ,                                   (2.7)

with ǫN an N -th root of unity. The fractional power here signifies that these vacua are
permuted by θ → θ + 2π. The interesting line operators in this theory are the Wilson
line in the fundamental representation W in the class (ze , zm ) = (1, 0) and its powers in
(ze , zm ) = (n, 0). ’t Hooft line operators exist, but they are associated with roots. W
exhibits an area law in all these vacua, signaling confinement.
    How does this story change when the gauge group is SU (N )/ZN ? Clearly, the spec-
trum of particles, the local operators and their correlation functions in R4 cannot be
modified. They are invariant under θ → θ + 2π. Hence, this theory should still have N
vacua that are permuted by this shift. However, now we know that for a given θ ∈ [0, 2π)
there are actually N distinct theories differing by their line operators (2.1). Since the gen-
erator γ of the Z2N symmetry of the SU (N ) theory shifts θ by 2π, and since this operation
is not a symmetry of the set of line operators (it maps the theory with n to the theory with
n + 1), the SU (N )/ZN theory cannot have a Z2N R-symmetry. Its only global symmetry
is a Z2 subgroup, which is part of the Lorentz group.
    Since the SU (N )/ZN theory does not have a discrete symmetry relating its N vacua,
the correlation functions of line operators in these vacua can be different. One way to see
that this is indeed the case, is to view this N = 1 SYM theory as a mass deformation of
the N = 2 pure SYM theory. The N vacua of the N = 1 theory originate from N multi-
monopole points on the moduli space of the N = 2 theory. The electric and magnetic
charges of the monopoles that condense there are the same for G = SU (N )/ZN as for
G = SU (N ). Their electric and magnetic charges are all in the root lattice.

                                             14
    Let us examine the physics of the N vacua. Without loss of generality we can con-
sider the SU (N )/ZN theory with n = 0. In this theory the basic ’t Hooft operator H
has the charge (λe , λm ) = (0, 1), corresponding to a magnetic weight in the fundamental
representation. Let us first assume that N is prime. Then, in one of the N vacua the
charge of the condensed monopoles is (λe , λm ) = (0, N ), and is aligned with the charges
of H. Therefore, H exhibits a perimeter law. This perimeter law signifies the fact that
the magnetic gauge group is Higgsed to ZN , and at low energies we have a ZN gauge
symmetry. In the remaining N − 1 vacua the condensed dyons carry nontrivial electric
charges, and therefore H exhibits an area law, as do all the other line operators carrying
nontrivial center charges.
    If N is not prime, the discussion is a bit more involved. Consider the k-th vacuum.
By shifting θ by 2πk, the condensed dyons in that vacuum become purely magnetic. After
that shift the nontrivial line operator H belongs to the class (ze , zm ) = (k, 1). For k 6= 0
this line still exhibits an area law. However, the line operator H N/l with l = gcd(N, k)
belongs to the class (ze , zm ) = (0, N/l), and therefore its charges are aligned with those
of the condensed monopoles. Hence, H N/l exhibits a perimeter law signaling the breaking
of the magnetic gauge symmetry to Zl . We conclude that in the k-th vacuum there is an
unbroken Zl gauge symmetry. The line operator associated with this symmetry is H N/l ,
and we will discuss the surface operators related to it in section 6.4 below.
    This understanding of the N vacua leads to interesting consequences when the theory
is placed on R3 × S1 . If the gauge group is SU (N ), the four-dimensional theory has
N confining vacua, which are related by a symmetry. The compactified theory has the
same N vacua. However, if the gauge group is SU (N )/ZN , some of the vacua have an
unbroken Zl gauge symmetry. Such a vacuum leads to l vacua in the compactified theory.
So, the total number of supersymmetric vacua of SU (N )/ZN SYM theories on a circle is
PN
  k=1 gcd(N, k). For prime values of N , this is 2N − 1.


2.3. SU (N )/Zk with k a divisor of N

    Let us classify the allowed sets of charges of line operators when the gauge group is
G = SU (N )/Zk . Let us write kk ′ = N . The purely electric line operators have the charges
proportional to (ze , zm ) = (k, 0) mod N . The line operator with minimal magnetic charge
has the charge (ze , zm ) = (n, k ′ ) mod N for some n; clearly n can be chosen from 0 to k −1.
Our completeness requirement implies that one, and exactly one, of these line operators

                                              15
             (SU (4)/Z2 )0              (SU (4)/Z2 )1                       SU (4)

 Figure 3: The Z4 charges of line operators in the theories (SU (4)/Z2 )0,1 and SU (4).

must appear. The locality does not place any further condition on n. Thus, we see that
the allowed choices of the sets of charges of line operators are

                       Lk,n = {(ze , zm ) = e(k, 0) + m(n, k ′ ) mod N },               (2.8)

where e and m are integers, and n = 0, 1, . . . , k − 1. With this extended notation, the set
Ln in (2.1) is LN,n . We denote by (SU (N )/Zk )n the SU (N )/Zk theory with line operators
given by Lk,n . As examples, we show the cases (SU (4)/Z2 )0,1 in Figure 3 (compare to
Figure 2).
    The shift of the θ-angle by 2π sends (ze , zm ) to (ze + zm , zm ). Therefore this sends
Lk,n → Lk,n+k′ . In other words, we have

                         (SU (N )/Zk )θ+2π
                                      n    = (SU (N )/Zk )θn+k′ mod k .                 (2.9)

When gcd(k, k ′ ) = 1, this implies that every choice of n can be reached by shifting the
standard θ-angle θ. However, when gcd(k, k ′ ) = l 6= 1, however, the shift of θ only maps
the theory (SU (N )/Zk )n to other theories with the same (n mod l), and there are l sets of
theories that are not related by shifts of the θ-angle. This is our first example of theories
with the same gauge group, which are distinguished by a “discrete θ-angle” that is not
related to the original θ-angle; we will discuss the Euclidean path integral realization of
this distinction in section 6 below. This can happen if and only if N has some prime factor
that appears more than once in its decomposition into primes (namely, N is not square-
free). The first example is N = 4, where the (SU (4)/Z2 )0 and (SU (4)/Z2 )1 theories are
not related by shifting the θ-angle.
    It is possible to generalize our previous analysis of the behavior of the different vacua
of the N = 1 pure SYM theory to all these theories, but we will not do this here.

                                               16
2.4. S-duality of N = 4 supersymmetric theories

      Let us consider now the transformation under S-duality of N = 4 SYM theories.
When the gauge group is U (N ), the theory is invariant under an SL(2, Z) transformation,
which maps the complex gauge coupling

                                                θ  4πi
                                          τ=      + 2                                      (2.10)
                                               2π   g

to τ → (aτ + b)/(cτ + d), with a, b, c, d integers satisfying ad − bc = 1. This transformation
group is generated by T which takes θ → θ + 2π or τ → τ + 1, and by a generator S which
takes τ → −1/τ .
      Let us now consider N = 4 SYM theories with gauge algebra g = su(N ). The
magnetic dual algebra in this case is also g∗ = su(N ). Usually it is stated that the theory
with G = SU (N ) is mapped by the S generator to the theory with G = SU (N )/ZN , but we
found that there are N variations of the latter theory, so the full story is more complicated7 .
In general we found above that there are distinct theories (SU (N )/Zk )n mod k , differing
by the global structure of the gauge group and by the set of charges of the line operators
Lk,n .
      Let us consider how the S-duality acts on this set of theories8 . We already discussed
above how the T generator maps a given theory to another theory with the same k, but
with a possibly different value of n. The S generator acts on the weights (λe , λm ) of the
line operator as
                                S:    (λe , λm )    7→     (λm , −λe ).                    (2.11)

Therefore, it takes the set L of conjugacy classes of charges of line operators to the set L∗
of charges of the dual theory, given by

                             (ze , zm ) ∈ L   ⇐⇒         (zm , −ze ) ∈ L∗ .                (2.12)

For example, when the original theory is (SU (N )/Zk )0 with the set Lk,0 of charges, the dual
set of charges is precisely Lk′ ,0 where kk ′ = N . Therefore the dual theory is (SU (N )/Zk′ )0 .
This is what is usually stated as the change in the global structure of the gauge group under
S-duality.
  7
      The case of g = su(2) was discussed in [28,7].
  8
      In theories with extended supersymmetry there are also BPS versions of line operators and
surface operators, which are labeled by additional parameters. We do not discuss these here.

                                                   17
       It is not difficult to generalize this to the full set of theories that we discussed above.
Given Lk,n , the lattice (Lk,n )∗ must again be of the form Lk∗ ,n∗ , determining the S-dual
of (SU (N )/Zk )n to be (SU (N )/Zk∗ )n∗ . The numbers k ∗ and n∗ can be determined by
finding the minimal charges of the form

                                (0, k ∗ ),   (−N/k ∗ , n∗ ) ∈ Lk,n .                       (2.13)

First, the charge of the form (0, k ∗ ) can be found by choosing e and m in (2.8) to be
e = −n/gcd(n, k), m = k/gcd(n, k). Here we use the convention gcd(0, k) = k. Then, we
have
                               k ∗ = kk ′ /gcd(n, k) = N/gcd(n, k).                        (2.14)

We can find integers e0 and m0 such that e0 k + m0 n = gcd(k, n). Then, n∗ = −m0 k ′ .
       It is interesting to ask whether the full SL(2, Z) group maps all these different theories
to each other or not. For prime values of N the answer is clearly yes; the S generator maps
SU (N ) to (SU (N )/ZN )0 , and the T generator then relates this to all the other theories.
However, in general the answer is no. If there is some k such that gcd(k, N/k) = l, then
the (SU (N )/Zk )0 has electric and magnetic charges that are all multiples of l, and this is
still the case also after we perform any SL(2, Z) transformation. Thus, these theories sit
in separate orbits of SL(2, Z) from the SU (N ) and SU (N )/ZN theories.
       In fact, this is the only case where separate orbits exist; namely, if N is square-
free (every prime factor in the decomposition of N into primes appears once), then all
the different theories we discussed are in the same orbit of SL(2, Z). To see this, note
first that the SU (N ) gauge theory is mapped to itself under the subgroup of SL(2, Z)
that is generated by T and by ST N S. This subgroup is denoted by Γ0 (N ). The space
of couplings of the SU (N ) theory that are inequivalent is thus a fundamental domain of
Γ0 (N ). However, we know that every SL(2, Z) transformation relates our SU (N ) theory to
one of the other theories, and that every fundamental domain of SL(2, Z) contains precisely
one value of the coupling which is related by SL(2, Z) to weak coupling (τ → i∞). So,
the number of different weak coupling limits that an SU (N ) gauge theory has, or, in other
words, the number of inequivalent theories that it maps to under the full SL(2, Z) group,
is given by the number of fundamental domains of SL(2, Z) inside the fundamental domain
of Γ0 (N ). This number, called the index of Γ0 (N ), is equal to
                                                      Y         1
                                 index(Γ0 (N )) = N         (1 + ),                        (2.15)
                                                                p
                                                      p|N


                                                18
                                                                                                      (SU (3)/Z3 )1
                                                                                              T
                                                               S
   su(3):                           T         SU (3)                    (SU (3)/Z3 )0                     T         S
                                                                                              T       (SU (3)/Z3 )2
                                               T (SU (4)/Z4 )1 T
                          S                                                                           S
   su(4):        SU (4)       (SU (4)/Z4 )0                S                        (SU (4)/Z4 )2         (SU (4)/Z2 )−       (SU (4)/Z2 )+
                                               T (SU (4)/Z4 )3 T
                   T                                                                                            T                 S,T
                                                                            T

                                                                         SU (6)

                                                                            S

                                                                    (SU (6)/Z6 )0
                                                       T                                          T

                                                                                S
                              (SU (6)/Z6 )5                                                                   (SU (6)/Z6 )1


                                                                            T
                                                   (SU (6)/Z3 )1                       (SU (6)/Z3 )2
   su(6):
                                                                        T            T

                                                                    (SU (6)/Z3 )0

                                      T                                     S                                    T

                                                       S            (SU (6)/Z2 )0                 S

                                                                            T

                                                                    (SU (6)/Z2 )1

                                                                            S
                                                               T                            T
                                      (SU (6)/Z6 )4                 (SU (6)/Z6 )3                   (SU (6)/Z6 )2


      Figure 4: S-duality orbits of the N = 4 SYM theory with g = su(3), su(4), su(6).

where the product runs over all the prime factors of N . On the other hand, the total number
                                      P
of distinct theories that we found is k|N k, where the sum goes over all the divisors k of
N . It is easy to check that these two numbers are the same if and only if N is square-free.
In this case all the different theories we discussed are related by SL(2, Z) transformations,
while otherwise this is not the case. The first value of N exhibiting separate SL(2, Z)
orbits is N = 4, where the (SU (4)/Z2 )0 theory is mapped to itself under the full SL(2, Z)
group, while the other 6 theories are permuted.
       To illustrate the discussions so far, we show the duality orbits of N = 4 theories with
g = su(3), g = su(4) and g = su(6) in Figure 4.9 As discussed, we see that there is just
  9
       Some of the arrows in the su(6) case were wrongly oriented in previous versions. The authors
thank Francesco Benini for pointing out the issue.

                                                                   19
one orbit for g = su(3) and g = su(6), but there are two orbits for g = su(4).
    The distinctions between the different theories that we discuss here are important
when computing the partition functions of N = 4 SYM on compact manifolds, and using
them to test S-duality [27,29,30]. We will discuss the precise way to compute these partition
functions in section 6.
    The AdS/CFT correspondence [31] maps the N = 4 SYM theory with g = su(N )
to the type IIB string theory on AdS5 × S 5 . In this context the distinction between the
different theories we discuss arises from the need to carefully quantize the topological
theory                                    Z
                                     N
                                 S=                  BRR ∧ dBNS                           (2.16)
                                    2πi       AdS5

that arises in the type IIB string theory at low energies [32,33,34]. One possibility is
to make the U (1) gauge field (dual to the singleton modes in the bulk, including the
two-forms BRR and BNS ) dynamical, so that the gauge theory becomes a U (N ) theory
(see e.g. [35,36]). Similar issues arise also in the 6d AN (2, 0) SCFT, dual to M theory on
AdS7 ×S 4 , where the surface operator [37] is not mutually local with respect to itself. Such
theories, containing operators that are not mutually local, are analogous to holomorphic
blocks of 2d conformal field theories. They are not standard consistent local quantum
field theories by themselves, but can be viewed either as generalizations of local quantum
field theories where the expectation values are elements of a vector space rather than
well-defined numbers [33] (see also [38,39,40,41], and [42] and references therein), or as
building blocks for constructing consistent local quantum field theories. Consistent string
constructions must lead to completely local theories, and this places further constraints on
them [43].



3. so(N ) gauge theories

3.1. The theories

    For odd N the center C of Spin(N ) is Z2 , where the Z2 charge is carried by all the
spinor representations. The dual group in this case is g∗ = sp((N − 1)/2) = usp(N − 1),
which also has a Z2 center carried by the fundamental (vector) representation. The possible
lines are in the sets (ze , zm ) with ze = 0, 1 and zm = 0, 1. The Spin(N ) theory has line
operators with (ze , zm ) = (0, 0) and (ze , zm ) = (1, 0). There are two different theories with
SO(N ) gauge group, generalizing our previous discussion for N = 3. The SO(N )+ theory

                                                20
has line operators with (ze , zm ) = (0, 0) and (ze , zm ) = (0, 1), while the SO(N )− theory
has lines with (ze , zm ) = (0, 0) and (ze , zm ) = (1, 1).
     For even N the dual magnetic group is g∗ = so(N ), and the center C of Spin(N )
depends on (N mod 4). It is Z2 × Z2 for (N = 0 mod 4) and it is Z4 for (N = 2 mod 4).
Correspondingly, the representations are split into four classes, which are the vector class,
the adjoint (trivial) class, and two spinor classes. In section 5 we will discuss the Spin(N )
and Spin(N )/H theories for all these cases in detail. Here we will focus on a particular
quotient SO(N ) = Spin(N )/Z2 , which has electric Wilson lines in the trivial class and
in the vector class. Mutual locality requires the lines that are not purely electric to have
magnetic charges in the vector class. One can then either choose these lines to be purely
magnetic, or dyonic with spinor electric charges. Correspondingly, there are two theories
SO(N )± , just as in the case when N is odd.
     Up to now the situation is very similar to the discussion for N = 3 around (1.5).
However, the N = 3 and N = 4 cases are somewhat different than higher values of N .
For N = 3 we saw that the shift of θ by 2π exchanges the two theories. For N = 4, we
have SO(4) = [SU (2) × SU (2)]/Z2 , and therefore there are actually two θ-angles, θs with
s = 1, 2, one for each SU (2) factor. In this case the Witten effect gives an action on line
operators that implies
                                       θ1 ,θ2        θ1 +2π,θ2
                                  SO(4)+      = SO(4)−         .                         (3.1)

     For higher values of N the two SO(N ) theories are not related by a shift of θ, but
rather

                                    SO(N )θ± = SO(N )θ+2π
                                                     ±    .                              (3.2)

This can be seen by examining the roots and weights of so(N ) and its Langlands duals
usp(N − 1) (for odd N ) or so(N ) (for even N ), and by examining the shift of the electric
charges under a shift of θ. Equivalently, the same conclusion follows from the fact that
these theories do not have half-instantons [44], so they must be invariant under θ → θ +2π.
Note that in the SO(4) theory a configuration which has a half-integer instanton number
in the first SU (2), and a half-integer instanton number in the second SU (2), can be present
as long as the sum of the two instanton numbers is an integer.

                                                 21
3.2. The pure N = 1 SYM theory

    As in the previous examples, we consider now the implications for the N = 1 pure
SYM theory. The Spin(N ) theory with N > 4 has a discrete Z2(N−2) R-symmetry acting
on the gauginos. The theory is characterized by the instanton factor η = Λ3(N−2) . It has
(N − 2) vacua with
                                           1        1
                                  hλλi =     (16η) N −2 ǫN−2 ,                            (3.3)
                                           2
with ǫN−2 an N − 2-th root of unity. (We use here the conventions of [3,18].) These vacua
are associated with the breaking of Z2(N−2) to Z2 , which is in the Lorentz group.
    Again, N = 3 and N = 4 are slightly different. We have already discussed N = 3
above. For N = 4, Spin(4) = SU (2)×SU (2) so the global symmetry is Z4 ×Z4 (a separate
                                                                      1
Z4 for each factor), and there are four vacua with h(λλ)s i = ǫ2 (s)ηs2 , where s = 1, 2 labels
the two SU (2) factors and ηs = Λ6s are their instanton factors. The effective superpotential
in these vacua is
                                           1           1
                                 W = 2η12 ǫ2 (1) + 2η22 ǫ2 (2) .                          (3.4)

Something special happens for η1 = η2 . Then, in the two vacua with ǫ2 (1) = ǫ2 (2) =
±1 the superpotential is nonzero, and in the other two with ǫ2 (1) = −ǫ2 (2) = ±1 the
superpotential vanishes. This point was crucial in [3,18] and will be important below.
    Both for even and odd N , the nontrivial Wilson line in the spinor representation
exhibits an area law in all of these vacua. For even N the Wilson line in the vector
representation is also confined. (For odd N it is screened by the gluons, because they are
in the same conjugacy class.)
    For N > 4, the SO(N )± theories are invariant under θ → θ + 2π, so they also have
the Z2(N−2) symmetry and N − 2 vacua. But the dynamics of the vacua are different.
Using the notation of odd N (with an obvious interpretation for even values of N ) in all
the vacua of the SO(N )+ theory the nontrivial line with (ze , zm ) = (0, 1) has a perimeter
law associated with an unbroken Z2 gauge symmetry. On the other hand, in all the vacua
of the SO(N )− theory the nontrivial line with (ze , zm ) = (1, 1) has an area law. For even
values of N , the Wilson line in the vector representation also has an area law in all these
cases.
    Correspondingly, the Spin(N ) theory on R3 × S1 has (N − 2) vacua. The SO(N )+
theory on R3 × S1 has 2(N − 2) vacua, while the SO(N )− theory has (N − 2) vacua.

                                               22
      Again, the case of N = 4 is slightly different. In the SO(4)± theories, the global
symmetry10 is not Z4 × Z4 symmetry but rather Z4 × Z2 . The four vacua of the Spin(4)
theory, labeled by ǫ2 (s) = ±1, are still present. In the SO(4)+ theory, the two vacua
with ǫ2 (1) = ǫ2 (2) = ±1 exhibit a perimeter law for the nontrivial ’t Hooft line operator,
associated with an unbroken Z2 gauge symmetry. In the other two vacua, that have
ǫ2 (1) = −ǫ2 (2) = ±1, this line operator is confined. This situation is reversed in the
SO(4)− theory. The Wilson line in the vector representation is confined in all of these
cases. Correspondingly, the two SO(4) theories both have 6 supersymmetric vacua on
R3 × S 1 .

3.3. N = 1 with vectors – duality

      We saw above that when we include in the spectrum of line operators the Wilson line in
the vector representation, the discussion of odd and even values of N is very similar. This
is the case in particular whenever we have dynamical fields in the vector representation,
which can screen the Wilson lines in the vector representation.
      The dynamics of the N = 1 supersymmetric SO(N ) gauge theory for different numbers
of colors N and flavors Nf was analyzed in detail in [3,18,45]. In that discussion the focus
was on the local structure. We saw above that each of these theories comes in three
versions: Spin(N ), SO(N )+ , and SO(N )− . Here we will extend the analysis to take this
fact into account, focusing on the case of Nf ≥ N .
      For these values of Nf it was found that the so(N ) theory with Nf chiral multiplets Qi
(i = 1, · · · , Nf ) in the vector representation and no superpotential is dual at low energies
to an so(Nf − N + 4) theory with Nf chiral multiplets qi in the vector representation,
singlet mesons M ij (i, j = 1, · · · , Nf ), and a tree level superpotential [2,3,18]

                                               1
                                       W =       M ij qi qj .                               (3.5)
                                              2µ

The parameter µ is related to the instanton factors η and ηe of the two theories through

                                          1
                                    ηe
                                     η=     8
                                              (−1)Nf −Nc µNf .                              (3.6)
                                          2
 10
      Note that the symmetry group in this case is not a standard supersymmetry algebra with an
R-symmetry and a global symmetry that commutes with supersymmetry; this is related to the
fact that the local dynamics of these theories is a sum of separate SU (2) theories, with separate
super-Poincaré symmetries acting on each one.

                                                 23
We claim that taking the global structure into account this duality actually maps

                              Spin(N ) ←→ SO(Nf − N + 4)−
                              SO(N )+ ←→ SO(Nf − N + 4)+                                  (3.7)
                              SO(N )− ←→ Spin(Nf − N + 4)

The discussion in [46] can be interpreted as indicating a duality between Spin(N ) and
SO(Nf − N + 4), but it did not take into account the two different SO(N ) theories, and
therefore did not discuss the SO(N )+ ←→ SO(Nf − N + 4)+ duality. Note that, for
N, Nf − N + 4 > 4, the periodicity of the θ-angle in all three theories is 2π (3.2), consistent
with (3.6); we will discuss what happens for lower values of N and Nf − N + 4 in the next
subsection.
    We start with the mapping for Nf ≥ N > 4; one can flow from here to lower values of
Nf and N by turning on mass terms and Higgsing. The original so(N ) theory has a moduli
space of vacua labeled (partly) by M ij = Qi Qj , which satisfies rank(M ) ≤ N . Consider the
component of the moduli space where rank(M ) = N , so that the gauge group is completely
broken. For every such value of M we have two supersymmetric vacua, differing by the
sign of the vacuum expectation value of a baryon operator B = QN . For large hM i the
theory is weakly coupled, and it is clear that in the Spin(N ) theory, the spinor Wilson line
has a perimeter law (related to a Z2 gauge symmetry), while the nontrivial line operators
of the SO(N )± theories exhibit an area law.
    In the dual theory, with the same expectation values of M , N of the flavors become
massive, so at low energies there is an so(Nf − N + 4) theory with (Nf − N ) massless
flavors q. Ignoring the superpotential for a moment, we can give expectation values to
these flavors, and break the gauge group to so(4), with equal instanton factors ηlow for its
two su(2) factors, proportional to powers of the various VEVs. Now we can repeat the
analysis around (3.4) of this low energy effective theory. The theory has four vacua. Two
                                                                                   √
of them, with ǫ2 (1) = ǫ2 (2) = ±1 have a nonzero superpotential proportional to ηlow ,
which in our case leads to a runaway behavior with no supersymmetric vacuum. The other
two vacua, the ones with ǫ2 (1) = −ǫ2 (2) = ±1, have a vanishing superpotential, and we
can identify them with the two vacua that we found above [3] (for a given expectation
value of M , and after fixing the expectation value of q using the superpotential). When
the gauge group is Spin(Nf − N + 4), the nontrivial line operator is a spinor Wilson line,
which is confined in these vacua. When the gauge group is SO(Nf − N + 4)± there is

                                              24
also a single nontrivial line operator. Our discussion of the line operators of SO(4) at the
end of section 3.2 implies that this line operator has an area law in the SO(Nf − N + 4)+
theory, and a perimeter law in the SO(Nf − N + 4)− theory, where there is an unbroken
gauged Z2 symmetry as discussed above. We conclude that the Spin(N ) theory must map
to the SO(Nf − N + 4)− theory. Since performing the duality twice should lead us back
to the original theory, we find the mapping (3.7).
    We can test this result by turning on masses for all the flavors of the so(N ) theory.
In the original theory we flow at low energies to the (N − 2) vacua of the pure so(N ) SYM
theory, discussed in the previous subsection. As we discussed there, the Spin(N ) and
SO(N )− theories exhibit an area law for their nontrivial line operator, while the SO(N )+
theory exhibits a perimeter law.
    Let us check what happens in the dual theory [3,18], which now has the tree level
superpotential
                                        1             1
                              W =         M ij qi qj + mij M ij ,                      (3.8)
                                       2µ             2
where the second term in (3.8) is the mass term we turned on in the original so(N ) theory.
We should find the (N − 2) vacua of the original theory in this theory.
    Classically, the equations of motion of M ij from (3.8) lead to qi qj = −µmij , so we
must have nonzero VEVs for qi such that qi qj has rank Nf , but this is impossible since
Nf > Nf − N + 4. Thus, there are no classical vacua. To find supersymmetric vacua,
let us explore the region in field space with generic nonzero M . Here the dual quarks
qi are massive and they can be integrated out. The low energy theory is a pure gauge
so(Nf − N + 4) theory with scale ηelow = ηeµ−Nf det(M ). Gaugino condensation in this
pure gauge theory leads to an effective superpotential

                     1                                             1
           Wef f =     (Nf − N + 2)(16µ−Nf ηe det(M ))1/(Nf −N+2) + mij M ij .         (3.9)
                     2                                             2

The equations of motion of M now lead to (N − 2) supersymmetric vacua with
                                       Nf −N Nf
                                                           (N 1−2)  ij
                                   (−1)      µ     det(m)            1
                  hM ij i = ǫN−2
                                            16eη                     m
                                                      ij                           (3.10)
                                                 1     1
                          = ǫN−2 (16η det(m)) (N −2)         ,
                                                      m

where ǫN−2 is an (N − 2)-th root of one. These (N − 2) vacua map exactly (including
the value of the superpotential) to those of the original theory. In these vacua again the

                                               25
nontrivial line operators of the Spin(Nf − N + 4) and SO(Nf − N + 4)− theories exhibit an
area law (as in our analysis of the previous subsection), while that of the SO(Nf − N + 4)+
theory exhibits a perimeter law. This is consistent with our mapping (3.7).
    The mapping (3.7) is also consistent with the relation between the N = 1 duality and
the low-energy dynamics of N = 2 supersymmetric gauge theories [47,48] (see also [49,50]
and references therein). The moduli space of the N = 2 SQCD theory with g = so(N ) and
Nf /2 fundamental hypermultiplets contains (for Nf < 2N −4) a point where the low-energy
theory is an g = so(Nf − N + 4) theory with Nf /2 fundamental hypermultiplets. Upon
breaking to N = 1 supersymmetry by adding a mass term for the adjoint chiral superfield,
the physics at this point has two different descriptions, which realize a deformation of
the N = 1 duality described above by a quartic superpotential for the quarks. In this
realization, the so(Nf − N + 4) theory originates from a subgroup of the so(N ) theory,
so the allowed electric weights of line operators in the so(Nf − N + 4) theory should be
a subset of the allowed weights in the so(N ) theory (when viewing so(Nf − N + 4) as a
subalgebra of so(N )). This is consistent with our mapping (3.7), that maps all the lines
with spinorial electric charges to other lines with spinorial electric charges.

3.4. Triality for Nf = N − 1 and for Nf = N

    In the cases of Nf = N and Nf = N − 1, we obtain so(3) and so(4) theories on
the right-hand side of (3.7), and in these theories the SO(N )+ and SO(N )− theories are
related by shifting the θ-angle, as we saw in (1.5), (3.1). This gives us an extra relation
also between the so(N ) theories on the left-hand side; in [3,45] this was called a triality for
the case of Nf = N − 1. In our language it generally involves relations between 4 different
theories.
    Let us start with the case of so(N ) with Nf = N − 1. According to [3], the dual
description of this is as above, but with an extra term in the superpotential; this theory is
equivalent at low energies to an so(3) theory with singlets M and with

                                      1               1
                               W =      M ij qi qi −     det(M ),                        (3.11)
                                     2µ              64η

and with a scale
                                               µ2(N−1)
                                        ηe =            .                                (3.12)
                                                214 η 2
For example, the Spin(N ) theory with Nf = N − 1 is equivalent to the SO(3)− theory
with this superpotential. But, we know that the latter theory is also equivalent to an

                                                26
SO(3)+ theory with θe shifted by 2π. By the duality (3.7), and using the relation (3.12),
this is equivalent to an SO(N )+ theory in which we shift the θ-angle by π, taking η → −η,
except that this shift would give us an extra minus sign in the last term of (3.11), which
we do not get here. So, we find [3] that the Spin(N ) theory with Nf = N − 1 and with
coupling constant η is equivalent at low energies to an SO(N )+ theory with coupling (−η)
and with an extra superpotential
                                            1
                                   W =−        det(M ).                               (3.13)
                                           32η
The spinor Wilson line of the Spin(N ) theory is mapped by this duality to the ’t Hooft
line of the SO(N )+ theory. Similarly, since the shift by 2π takes the Spin(3) theory to
itself, we find that the SO(N )− theory with coupling η is equivalent to another SO(N )−
theory with coupling (−η), and with the same superpotential (3.13). Despite appearances,
and even though the nontrivial dyonic line of the SO(N )− theory maps to itself, this is a
strong/weak coupling duality, as can be seen by mapping the supersymmetric vacua [3].
In particular, vacua in which electrically-charged particles condense are exchanged with
vacua in which magnetically-charged particles condense.
    We can now repeat the same story for Nf = N , where the dual theory has only the first
term in the superpotential (3.11). The complication here is that to relate the two different
so(4) theories we need to shift the θ-angle of one of the su(2) subgroups of so(4) by 2π
(see (3.1)), and this does not map just to a change of the θ-angle in the original theory.
Using the fact that the difference between the operators (Wα2 ) of the two su(2) groups
maps to the baryon operator B = QN (with the color and flavor indices all contracted
anti-symmetrically) [3], similar arguments to those of the previous paragraph imply that
the Spin(N ) theory with Nf = N flavors and coupling η is equivalent at low energies to
an SO(N )+ theory with coupling (−η) and with an extra superpotential

                                         W = βB.                                      (3.14)

A similar relation holds for two SO(N )− theories. It is not clear how to directly find the
value of β, since the operator mapping is only known near the point β = 0. However, we
can find this coefficient by adding a mass term, and flowing to the duality described in the
previous paragraph; upon integrating out the massive quark, the superpotential propor-
tional to B becomes precisely the superpotential proportional to det(M ) of (3.13). This
                                   √
consideration implies that β = ±i/4 η; the two choices are related by charge conjugation
(which, for so(4), exchanges the two su(2) factors).

                                            27
4. g = sp(N )

4.1. The theories

     In this section we consider theories based on the Lie algebra g = sp(N ) ≡ usp(2N ).
Its center is C = Z2 , with the fundamental (vector) representation charged under the
center, so we will be interested in two gauge groups Sp(N ) ≡ U Sp(2N ) and Sp(N )/Z2 .
The dual algebra is g∗ = so(2N + 1), with a nontrivial center representation carried by its
spinor weights.
     The classes of line operators are labeled by two elements of Z2 : (ze , zm ). If the gauge
group is Sp(N ), the allowed lines are in (ze , zm ) = (0, 0) and (ze , zm ) = (1, 0). When the
gauge group is Sp(N )/Z2 , the lines in (ze , zm ) = (1, 0) are not present. Instead, we have
two options: add the lines in (ze , zm ) = (0, 1) or add the lines in (ze , zm ) = (1, 1). We
refer to the first option with the purely magnetic lines as (Sp(N )/Z2 )+ , and to the second
option with the dyonic line as (Sp(N )/Z2 )− . These options with this terminology are
consistent with our discussion of Sp(1)/Z2 = SO(3) around (1.5), and with our discussion
of Sp(2)/Z2 = SO(5) in section 3.1.
     Let us study how the shift of θ by 2π affects these options. The weight lattice of
sp(N ) is ZN . An element λe = (vi ) ∈ ZN is in the adjoint class if the sum of vi is even.
Otherwise it is in the vector class. In the dual so(2N + 1) we use a normalization of the
weights which is twice the natural normalization; this is needed in order for the shift of θ
to act in a nice way, given that there is a factor of 2 between the length of the short and
long roots [29,51]. The magnetic weight lattice is then a sub-lattice of ZN . An element
λm = (wi ) ∈ ZN is in the magnetic weight lattice if all the wi are even or if all of them are
odd. In the first case it is in the adjoint class, and in the second case it is in the spinor class.
The line with nonzero magnetic charge of the Sp(N )/Z2 theory has the magnetic weight
λm = (1, 1, · · · , 1). In our current normalization the shift of θ by 2π changes λe → λe +λm .
Since λe = (1, 1, · · · , 1) is in the trivial class for even N , and in the vector class for odd N ,
we see that
                                                   θ+2π
                      (Sp(N )/Z2 )θ+ = (Sp(N )/Z2 )−             for odd N,
                                                                                               (4.1)
                                                   θ+2π
                      (Sp(N )/Z2 )θ± = (Sp(N )/Z2 )±             for even N.

Hence, for odd N we can absorb the ± label in extending the range of θ to be in [0, 4π)
(as in SU (N )/ZN ). However, for even N the periodicity of θ is still 2π and the two classes
of theories are not continuously connected, as in SO(N ) (indeed, SO(5) is equivalent to

                                                 28
Sp(2)/Z2 ). This fact is consistent with the discussion in [44], which shows the existence of
half instantons for Sp(N )/Z2 with odd N , and the absence of such instantons for even N .
     Before ending this sub-section we would like to comment on the Sp(N ) vs. Sp(Nf )
theories of [52] (see also [53]). These two theories are obtained by a shift of θ by π. Hence,
even using the traditional classification of theories based on θ ∈ [0, 2π) they are not new,
and they should not be confused with the theories we discuss above.

4.2. Pure N = 1 SYM theories

    Next we examine the consequences of this discussion for the N = 1 pure SYM theory.
The Sp(N ) gauge theory has a global Z2(N+1) R-symmetry, and its instanton factor is
η = Λ3(N+1) . The quantum theory has N + 1 vacua with [54]

                                                        1
                                    hλλi = ǫN+1 (2η) N +1 ,                              (4.2)

with ǫN+1 an N +1’st root of unity. In these vacua the Z2(N+1) symmetry is spontaneously
broken to Z2 . These vacua are related by shifting θ by 2π. In all of these vacua the Wilson
lines in (ze , zm ) = (1, 0) exhibit an area law, signaling confinement.
    The (Sp(N )/Z2 )± theories also have these N + 1 vacua, and the vacua are still related
by shifting θ by 2π. But the details depend on whether N is even or odd.
    For even N the theory with θ is the same as the theory with θ +2π, and hence all these
vacua are related by the Z2(N+1) symmetry. The nontrivial line operators exhibit area law
in all the vacua of the (Sp(N )/Z2 )− theory, and they exhibit a perimeter law associated
with an unbroken gauge Z2 symmetry in all the vacua of the (Sp(N )/Z2 )+ theory.
    For odd N the N +1 vacua are not all related by a symmetry. The discrete R-symmetry
of the (Sp(N )/Z2 )± theories is only ZN+1 . This discrete symmetry is spontaneously broken
to Z2 , which is in the Lorentz group. The N + 1 vacua are split into two orbits of the
discrete symmetry, with (N + 1)/2 vacua in each. In the vacua in one orbit the nontrivial
line operators of (Sp(N )/Z2 )+ exhibit an area law, and those of (Sp(N )/Z2 )− have a
perimeter law associated with an unbroken Z2 gauge symmetry. The two behaviors are
exchanged in the vacua of the other orbit.
    Repeating the argument for SU (N )/ZN , this discussion suggests that the Sp(N )
theory on R3 × S1 has N + 1 vacua. For even N the (Sp(N )/Z2 )− theory has N + 1 vacua,
while the (Sp(N )/Z2 )+ has 2(N + 1) vacua. For odd N , both of the (Sp(N )/Z2 )± theories
have 3(N + 1)/2 vacua.

                                              29
                                                          S
                                             Sp(N )               SO(2N + 1)+

                                               T                        T

                                         S                                        S
                          Spin(2N + 1)       (Sp(N )/Z2 )+        (Sp(N )/Z2 )−       SO(2N + 1)−
        even N
                               T                      T                T                  T

                                         S                    T                   S
                          Spin(2N + 1)       (Sp(N )/Z2 )+        (Sp(N )/Z2 )−       SO(2N + 1)−
         odd N
                               T                                                          T


   Figure 5: S-duality orbits of the N = 4 SYM theory with g = so(2N + 1), sp(N ).

4.3. S-duality in N = 4 SYM

    The N = 4 SYM theory has an S-duality transformation exchanging g = sp(N ) and
g∗ = spin(2N + 1). The generator of the S-duality group in this case takes τ → −1/(2τ ),
and the mapping of the electric and magnetic weights also involves an extra factor of 2; by
an abuse of notation we will refer to this generator as S. The full duality group in this case
is not SL(2, Z); it is generated by the S generator and by τ → τ + 1. We already discussed
how τ → τ + 1 permutes the different theories, and it is easy to determine how various
choices of line operators are mapped to each other under the S generator. Let us denote
by L ⊂ Z2 × Z2 the set of charges of line operators of the original sp(N ) theory. The set
L contains only one element in addition to (ze , zm ) = (0, 0). The Sp(N ) theory contains
(ze , zm ) = (1, 0). Thus, the dual theory contains lines with charges (ze , zm ) = (0, 1),
meaning that is an SO(2N + 1)+ theory. The (Sp(N )/Z2 )+ theory contains (ze , zm ) =
(0, 1). Then, the dual theory contains lines with charges (ze , zm ) = (1, 0), meaning that
this is an Spin(2N + 1) theory. Finally, the (Sp(N )/Z2 )− theory contains lines with
(ze , zm ) = (1, 1). Therefore, the dual theory contains lines with charges (1, 1), and this is
an SO(2N + 1)− theory. The full transformations of these theories under S-duality are
described in Figure 5. For even values of N there are three separate orbits, each containing
two theories. For odd values of N there is one orbit containing the Sp(N ) and SO(2N +1)+
theories, and the other four theories are in a second orbit.


5. g = so(N ) for even N

    In section 3 we already studied Spin(N ) and SO(N ). However, when N is even there
are additional possibilities of gauge group G for g = so(N ). The discussion depends on

                                                   30
whether N is divisible by 4 or not. Note that in these cases the magnetic dual algebra is
also g = so(N ).


5.1. N = 2 mod 4

    Let us begin with the simpler case when N is not divisible by 4, N > 2. Then, the
          e = Spin(N ) is C = Z4 . The two spinor representations transform as (±i) under
center of G
the generator of the center. The possible groups are Spin(N ), Spin(N )/Z2 = SO(N ) or
Spin(N )/Z4 . The first two cases were discussed already in section 3.
      Let us consider then G = Spin(N )/Z4 = SO(N )/Z2 . The class of charges of line
operators is characterized by (ze , zm ) ∈ Z4 × Z4 . The only purely electric lines have
(ze , zm ) = (0, 0). The maximality of the set of line operators requires the existence of a
line with charge (ze , zm ) = (n, 1), where n = 0, 1, 2, 3. Every choice is allowed by mutual
locality. So, we have the four theories (Spin(N )/Z4 )n mod 4 . By the Witten effect, shifting
θ by 2π sends (ze , zm ) to (ze ± zm , ze ), where the sign is + when N ≡ −2 mod 8 and −
when N ≡ +2 mod 8.11 This shifts n by ±1, or in other words we have


                       (Spin(N )/Z4 )θ+2π
                                     n    = (Spin(N )/Z4 )θn±1 mod 4 .                    (5.1)


As a special case note that for Spin(6) = SU (4) this agrees with our discussion of
SU (N )/ZN groups in section 2.1. The θ-angle has periodicity 8π, consistent with the
existence of quarter-instantons in this case [44].
      In the N = 1 SYM theory with the Spin(N )/Z4 gauge groups, the global symmetry
is Z(N−2)/2 , and the (N − 2) vacua spontaneously break this to Z2 . The vacua are split
into 4 classes. In each class the basic line operator of one of the (Spin(N )/Z4 ) theories has
a perimeter law, associated with a discrete Z4 gauge symmetry, the line operator of one
of the other theories has a perimeter law associated with a discrete Z2 gauge symmetry,
and those of the other two theories have an area law. Thus, when we compactify these
theories on R3 × S1 , they have (N − 2) + (N − 2)/2 + (N − 2)/4 + (N − 2)/4 = 2(N − 2)
supersymmetric vacua.

 11
      The authors thank Ho Tat Lam for noticing a small error in the previous version of the
paper. The dependence of the sign on N modulo 8 will be explained in the discussions around
(6.13) below.

                                              31
5.2. N = 0 mod 4: centers and charges

     Next, let us come to the more interesting case when N is a multiple of 4. In this case
there are two inequivalent spinor representations, that are not complex conjugates. The
          e = Spin(N ) is now ZS × ZC . Here the generator of ZS acts on one spinor
center of G                           2      2                               2
representation by (−1) and on the other representation by (+1), and the action of the
generator of ZC
              2 on the first spinor representation is by (+1) and on the second by (−1).
The vector representation appears in the product of the two spinor representations, so
it transforms as (−1) under both Z2 ’s. Let us denote the diagonal subgroup of ZS2 ×
ZC     V
 2 as Z2 . We now have the following possibilities for the quotients: G = Spin(N ),
G = Spin(N )/ZV2 = SO(N ), G = Spin(N )/ZS2 = Ss(N ), G = Spin(N )/Z2C = Sc(N ),
and G = Spin(N )/(Z2 × Z2 ) = SO(N )/Z2 . The Sc(N ) theory is related to the Ss(N )
theory by the Z2 outer-automorphism of Spin(N ), so it does not need to be treated
separately. Nevertheless, the two theories have different spectra of line operators, and it
will be useful to distinguish them when we discuss the action of S-duality later. The group
Ss(N ) is sometimes called the semispin group in the mathematical literature. We note in
passing that Ss(32) is the gauge group of the Type I superstring in ten dimensions.
     The weight lattice, both electric and magnetic, is given by the union of ZN/2 and
(ZN/2 + ( 21 , 12 , · · · , 12 , 21 )). The weights are divided into four classes forming Z2 × Z2 .
The adjoint class (0, 0) contains elements of ZN/2 such that the sum of their coordinates
is even, and the vector class (1, 1) contains the other elements of ZN/2 (in particular
λV = (1, 0, · · · , 0)). The two spinor classes (1, 0) and (0, 1) include the weight vectors
                     1 1             1 1                     1 1             1 1
              λS = (+ , + , · · · , + , + ),          λC = (+ , + , · · · , + , − ),         (5.2)
                     2 2             2 2                     2 2             2 2
respectively (and all other weight vectors given by these weights plus elements of the adjoint
class). Note that λS · λS = λC · λC is even when N = 8d, and is odd when N = 8d + 4,
whereas λS · λC is odd when N = 8d and even when N = 8d + 4. This will lead to some
differences between these two cases.
     The classes of charges of line operators are now labeled by

                       (ze,S , ze,C ; zm,S , zm,C ) ∈ (Z2 × Z2 ) × (Z2 × Z2 ).               (5.3)

The inner product determining the mutual locality condition is then
              ′           ′           ′           ′
        ze,S zm,S − zm,S ze,S + ze,C zm,C − zm,C ze,C = 0 mod 2, (N = 8d + 4)
                                                                                             (5.4)
              ′           ′           ′           ′
        ze,S zm,C − zm,C ze,S + ze,C zm,S − zm,S ze,C = 0 mod 2. (N = 8d)

                                                 32
For N > 4, shifting the θ-angle by 2π modifies the charges according to

              (ze,S , ze,C ; zm,S , zm,C ) → (ze,S + zm,S , ze,C + zm,C ; zm,S , zm,C ).   (5.5)

All the classes are periodic under θ → θ + 4π, consistent with the fact that these theories
have half-instantons but do not have quarter-instantons [44].

5.3. N = 0 mod 4: Possible choices of lines

    After these preparations, it is straightforward to classify all possible sets of charges
of line operators (we discuss here the cases of N > 4). The cases G = Spin(N ) and
G = SO(N ) have already been discussed in section 3. We found SO(N )± there.
    Let us next consider G = Spin(N )/ZS2 = Ss(N ). The purely electric lines have charges
in the classes (0, 0; 0, 0) and (1, 0; 0, 0). The maximality of the set of charges requires that
there are lines with charges

                                  (0, n; 0, 1) (if N = 8d + 4),
                                                                                           (5.6)
                                  (0, n; 1, 0) (if N = 8d).

Here n can be either 0 or 1, and correspondingly we have theories Ss(N )± . The effect of
the θ-angle is easy to see:

                           Ss(N )θ+2π
                                 +    = Ss(N )θ−          (if N = 8d + 4),
                                                                                           (5.7)
                           Ss(N )θ+2π
                                 ±    = Ss(N )θ±          (if N = 8d).

Note that our discussion, including the last line, is consistent with (3.2) when N = 8, as
Ss(8) and SO(8) are then equivalent by an outer automorphism of Spin(8).
    Let us finally consider the case G = Spin(N )/Z2 × Z2 = SO(N )/Z2 . The purely
electric lines have charges (0, 0; 0, 0). The maximality of the set of charges then requires
that there are lines with charges

                               (nSS , nSC ; 1, 0),     (nCS , nCC ; 0, 1),                 (5.8)

for some numbers {nSS , nSC , nCS , nCC } which can be 0 or 1. The mutual locality imposes
the constraint
                                  nSC = nCS          (if N = 8d + 4),
                                                                                           (5.9)
                                  nSS = nCC          (if N = 8d),

                                                     33
                                                        SO(N )+

                                                          S,T

                                                 T (Spin(N )/Z4 )1 T
                          S                                                              S
   odd d:      Spin(N )        (Spin(N )/Z4 )0           S             (Spin(N )/Z4 )2       SO(N )−
                                                 T (Spin(N )/Z4 )3 T
                   T                                                                           T

                                                 T (Spin(N )/Z4 )1 T
                          S                                                              S
  even d:      Spin(N )        (Spin(N )/Z4 )0           S             (Spin(N )/Z4 )2       SO(N )−
                                                 T (Spin(N )/Z4 )3 T
                   T                                                                           T


        Figure 6: S-duality orbits of the N = 4 SYM theories with g = so(4d + 2).

and nothing else. In total, we find eight theories. We label them as (SO(N )/Z2 ) nnSS nnSC
                                                                                                CS   CC
with the understanding that the relation (5.9) is satisfied. Under the shift of the θ-angle
by 2π, we have
                       (SO(N )/Z2 )θ+2π                  θ
                                   nSS nSC = (SO(N )/Z2 ) nSS +1,nSC                             (5.10)
                                      nCS nCC                     nCS    ,nCC +1

and the eight theories fall into four orbits under the shift of θ.
      The generalization of our previous discussions of N = 1 SYM to all of these cases is
straightforward.

5.4. N = 4

      The S-duality of N = 4 SYM maps the gauge algebra so(N ) to itself when N is even,
but it permutes the global structures and the choice of lines.
      When N = 4d + 2, the structure is exactly as in su(4) ≃ so(6). Therefore, under the
S-generator we have the mapping:
                                 Spin(N )         ←→ (Spin(N )/Z4 )0
                                 SO(N )−          ←→ (Spin(N )/Z4 )2                             (5.11)
                              (Spin(N )/Z4 )1     ←→ (Spin(N )/Z4 )3

while SO(N )+ is left invariant. Including the shift of theta discussed above, this implies
that (as for su(4)) six of the theories are in one orbit of SL(2, Z), while the SO(N )+ theory
is invariant under the full SL(2, Z) duality group. The orbits are shown in Figure 6.12
 12
      The authors thank Ho Tat Lam for noticing a small error in the previous version of the paper,
where we mistakenly used the same duality orbits for even d and odd d.

                                                   34
             Spin(N )           S       (SO(N )/Z2 ) ++ T (SO(N )/Z2 ) −+
                                                      ++                         +−




                      T                                                  S

             SO(N )−            S       (SO(N )/Z2 ) −− T (SO(N )/Z2 ) +−
                                                      −−                         −+




                T                                               S
             Ss(N )−            S       (SO(N )/Z2 ) ++ T (SO(N )/Z2 ) −+
                                                      −+                         −−




                T                                               S
             Sc(N )−            S       (SO(N )/Z2 ) +− T (SO(N )/Z2 ) −−
                                                      ++                         +−




                      T                                                  S
                                                S,T

                                              SO(N )+

            S,T              Ss(N )+                           Sc(N )+           S,T

 Figure 7: S-duality orbits of the N = 4 SYM theories with g = so(8d).

             Spin(N )           S       (SO(N )/Z2 ) ++ T (SO(N )/Z2 ) −+
                                                      ++                         +−




                      T                                                  S

             SO(N )−            S       (SO(N )/Z2 ) −− T (SO(N )/Z2 ) +−
                                                      −−                         −+




                      T                                                  S

             Ss(N )+                T      Ss(N )−         S     (SO(N )/Z2 ) ++
                                                                                 +−


                  S                                                          T
             Sc(N )+                       Sc(N )−               (SO(N )/Z2 ) −+
                                                                                 ++
                                    T                      S
                                                S,T
                          (SO(N )/Z2 ) +−               (SO(N )/Z2 ) −−
                                         −−                              −+



                                              SO(N )+

                                                S,T

Figure 8: S-duality orbits of the N = 4 SYM theories with g = so(8d + 4).

                                                35
      When N = 4d, the 15 possible theories are generally permuted by the full S-duality
group. For N = 8d, three theories are invariant under the full SL(2, Z), which are the
SO(N )+ , Ss(N )+ and Sc(N )+ theories. The other 12 theories fall into 4 separate orbits,
each containing 3 different theories. For example, the Spin(N ) theory is mapped by the
S generator to the (SO(N )/Z2 ) 00 theory, which is mapped by the T generator to the
                                    00

(SO(N )/Z2 ) 10 theory, which is mapped to itself by the S generator. The orbits are given
              01

in Figure 7. For N = 8d + 4, the only theory which is fully invariant under SL(2, Z) is
the SO(N )+ theory. The other theories are divided into two orbits containing 3 theories
(one of which contains Spin(N ), and the other contains SO(N )− ), one orbit of size 6,
and another orbit of size 2 (containing the (SO(N )/Z2 ) 01 and (SO(N )/Z2 ) 11 theories,
                                                              11                    10

which map to each other under T , and to themselves under S). The orbits are shown in
Figure 8.13



6. Summing over bundles in the Euclidean path integral

      When the spatial slice of the spacetime of our gauge theories is a nontrivial 3-manifold,
the states in the Hilbert space are characterized by discrete electric and magnetic charges
related to the center of the covering group (see [44] and references therein). As we will
discuss below, different charges are allowed in different theories of the types we discussed
above, with different Hilbert spaces. Correspondingly, the Euclidean partition functions
of these different theories on general 4-manifolds are different(though they are the same
on S4 and S3 × S1 ). In this last section, we discuss how the Euclidean partition function
distinguishes the different theories (with different sets of line operators), using the standard
θ-angle θ, and in some cases its discrete generalizations. We begin in section 6.1 with an
analysis of the Euclidean path integral and the possible θ-angles that appear in it. In
section 6.2 we show how to map these θ-angles to the theories we discussed in the previous
sections. In section 6.3 we generalize to the case where the center contains more than
one factor. In section 6.4 we discuss surface operators, and their relation to the Zk gauge
theories that we encountered above.
 13
      Previous versions had a couples of typos in the duality orbits of SO(N )− in Figure 7 (cor-
rected in v2) and Figure 8 (corrected in v5). The authors thank Oren Bergman and Sebastian
Rauch for corrections.

                                               36
6.1. θ-angles in the Euclidean path integral

      The standard θ-angle θ we are familiar with is a phase iθℓ in the action, where ℓ is the
instanton number. We always use the physicists’ normalization of the instanton number,
where a small instanton (that exists on any space) has instanton number 1. For a theory
with simply-connected gauge group G, e the instanton number is integer on any manifold,
and θ has 2π periodicity. When the gauge group G is not simply connected, the instanton
number can be fractional on a nontrivial manifold, or in the presence of a line operator.
Then, the periodicity of the θ-angle is 2πx, where x is an integer determined by G. This
x can further depend on whether we allow non-spin manifolds or not; in this paper we
assume for simplicity that every four-dimensional manifold we deal with is spin.
      When the gauge group G is not simply connected, the gauge bundle has additional
characteristic classes, other than the instanton number. Let us begin with the example of
G = Spin(N )/Z2 = SO(N ). In this case we have the Stiefel-Whitney classes w2,4 of the
gauge bundle, which are cohomology classes of degree 2 and 4 defined in Z2 , in addition to
the integer-valued Pontryagin class p1 (related to the instanton number) which is of degree
4. It is known (see [55] and references therein) that these classes are related by

                                   p1 = P(w2 ) + 2w4      mod 4.                               (6.1)

Here, on the right-hand side, we use the Pontryagin square operation P, which sends a
degree-2d mod-2 class to a degree-4d mod-4 class:

                            H 2d (X, Z2 ) ∋ v 7→ P(v) ∈ H 4d (X, Z4 ).                         (6.2)

This is a generalization of the usual square v 2 , in the sense that

                                        P(v) = v 2 mod 2.                                      (6.3)

Furthermore, by 2w4 , we mean the image of w4 under the homomorphism 2 : H 4 (X, Z2 ) →
H 4 (X, Z4 ) coming from the homomorphism Z2 → Z4 sending 1 mod 2 to 2 mod 4.14 In

 14
      This is not the standard notation in mathematics, but can be justified e.g. by considering
w4 as a cochain in C 2 (X, Z2 ), lifting it to C 2 (X, Z), multiplying it by 2 there, and reducing it
to C 2 (X, Z4 ). The notation P(w2 )/2 below is not standard in mathematics either, for which we
also provided a definition in this version. The authors thank Greg Moore for a discussion on these
points.

                                                 37
the following, we write the integral of P(w2 ) over the manifold simply as P(w2 ), to lighten
the notation.
    For G = SO(N ) with N ≥ 4, p1 = 2ℓ, where ℓ is the instanton number. On a spin
manifold the intersection product is even. Therefore P(w2 ) is 0 or 2 mod 4. We then define
P(w2 )/2 to be 0 or 1 mod 2, respectively. The equation (6.1) then says that ℓ can only be
integer, and that P(w2 )/2 is even or odd if (w4 − ℓ) is even or odd. Therefore, the θ-angle
θ is defined modulo 2π, and P(w2 )/2 (or, equivalently, w4 ) gives rise to an independent
discrete θ-angle; we can weigh the configurations in our Euclidean path integral by a phase

                                     P(w2 )
                         iθℓ + inπ          ,     θ ∼ θ + 2π, n = 0, 1.                 (6.4)
                                       2

    For G = SO(3), w4 = 0 and p1 = 4ℓ, where ℓ is the instanton number. Again, P(w2 )
is defined mod 4 and is even. Then, (6.1) says that ℓ can be half-integer, and P(w2 )/2 is
even or odd according to whether ℓ is integer or half-integer. Therefore, the θ-angle θ is
defined modulo 4π, and P(w2 )/2 does not give an independent discrete θ-angle. The term
we can write in the action is then

                                      iθℓ,      θ ∼ θ + 4π .                            (6.5)

Note that we can still equivalently use (6.4) instead.
    In principle we can study possible types of discrete θ-angles by having a look at all
the degree-4 characteristic classes of non-simply-connected groups G. More mathemati-
cally, this corresponds to the classification of H 4 (BG, U (1)), where BG is the classifying
space and H 4 refers to the standard singular cohomology. (For a readable account on
BG, see e.g. [56].) Instantons that can be put on an open set of R4 are measured by the
                              e which gives a natural subgroup of H 4 (BG, U (1)). When
homotopy group π3 (G) = π3 (G),
H 4 (BG, U (1)) is ≃ Z, the usual θ-angle with enlarged periodicity covers all the possible
choices of the phase in the Lagrangian. When this group has more structure, we need
additional discrete θ-angles to fully describe possible phases in the Lagrangian. Unfortu-
nately we could not find a comprehensive discussion of H 4 (BG, U (1)) in the mathematics
literature, although scattered results on many G’s can be found.
     Instead, we can proceed by following [57,44]. Let G e be a simple simply-connected
                                                               e k or G/Z
group. Then its quotient by a subgroup of the center is either G/Z    e 2 × Z2 ; the
                        e = Spin(4d). Fix a closed spin four-manifold X. Consider a
latter only occurs when G

                                                 38
                                                e
G-bundle on it. It cannot always be lifted to a G-bundle. This obstruction is controlled
by
                                            w2 ∈ H 2 (X, Zk )                                     (6.6)
         e k and by
when G = G/Z
                                          (1)   (2)
                                        w2 , w2 ∈ H 2 (X, Z2 )                                    (6.7)

when G = G/Z e 2 × Z2 .15 Let us consider two G-bundles E, E ′ with the same w2 . Then
                                                                                e (see
their difference can be measured by an integer instanton number in π3 (G) ≃ π3 (G)
e.g. footnote 14 of [44]). In other words, the instanton number mod 1 is uniquely deter-
mined by w2 , and the phase including the contributions from various characteristic classes
can always be written as
                                 2nπ P(w2 )
                       iθℓ + i              ,   θ ∼ θ + 2π, n = 0, 1, . . . , k − 1               (6.8)
                                  k    2
         e k , and
when G = G/Z

                X             (j)
                           P(w2 )          (1)  (2)
      iθℓ + i       nj π          + in12 πw2 · w2 ,        θ ∼ θ + 2π,    n1 , n12 , n2 = 0, 1    (6.9)
                             2
                j

         e 2 × Z2 . In order for (6.8) to be well-defined, we need a squaring operation
when G = G/Z
P(w2 ) such that P(w2 )/2 is well-defined modulo k. For even values of k we use here the
general Pontryagin square operation [58], which sends

                               H 2d (X, Zk ) ∋ v → P(v) ∈ H 4d (X, Z2k ).                        (6.10)

P(w2 )/2 is then defined in Zk , since our manifold X is spin. For odd values of k, by an
abuse of notation we also denote by P(v) the standard cup product

                             H 2d (X, Zk ) ∋ v → P(v) = v 2 ∈ H 4d (X, Zk ).                     (6.11)
 15                                                                                e bundle and
      These obstruction classes, controlling whether a G bundle can be lifted to a G
taking values in H 2 (X, Zk ), are often called (generalized) Stiefel-Whitney classes in physics liter-
ature. This usage is not standard in mathematics, where the Stiefel-Whitney classes instead refer
to characteristic classes wk ∈ H k (X, Z2 ) associated to a real bundle. There, w2 is related to the
lifting of an SO bundle to a Spin bundle but other wk ’s are not. The degree-2 class controlling
the lifting from P SU (N ) to U (N ) or SU (N ) is sometimes called the Brauer class in mathematical
literature, but unfortunately there seems to be no standard mathematical terminology for the
                                        e The authors thank Dan Freed and Michael Hopkins for
class controlling the lifting from G to G.
the correspondences on these issues.

                                                      39
    Here, since k is odd, 2 is invertible modulo k, and therefore P(v)/2 is again defined modulo
    k. As in the SO(N ) case, we expect that adding the characteristic class w4 to (6.8) should
    not add any additional information; it would be interesting to verify this by a careful
    analysis of the relevant bundles.
          In some cases, as in the SO(3) theory we discussed above, the term proportional to
    P(w2 )/2 can be replaced by a change in the periodicity of θ. This can be found by referring
    to the computation in [44] of the instanton number mod 1 in terms of w2 , for the case
               e
    where G = G/C   where C is the full center. For reference we list the results here. When
    e 6= Spin(4d), the fractional part of the instanton number is equal to
    G

                                                 P(w2 )
                                           ℓ=s             mod 1,                               (6.12)
                                                   2
    where s is given by16
                                      e
                                      G                       C         s
                               SU (N )                        ZN        1/N
                              Spin(N )     (N = 2d + 1)       Z2        0
                              Spin(N )     (N = 8d + 2)       Z4        −1/4
                              Spin(N )     (N = 8d + 6)       Z4        +1/4                    (6.13)
                                Sp(N )     (N = 2d)           Z2        0
                                Sp(N )     (N = 2d + 1)       Z2        1/2
                                      E6                      Z3        2/3
                                      E7                      Z2        1/2

    Here Spin(N ) is understood to have N ≥ 5. The analogous statement for the group
    G = Spin(N )/Z2 × Z2 is
                    ( 1 (1)    (2)
                        w · w2
                      2 2
                                     mod 1                          for N = 8d
                ℓ= 1         (1)           (2)                                                  (6.14)
                      2
                         P(w2    )/2 + P(w 2   )/2          mod 1    for N = 8d + 4 .

    For example, Sp(N )/Z2 has the following properties that can be verified using [60]:
N even: The periodicity of the θ-angle is 2π, P(w2 ) is linearly independent of the instanton
          number, and the difference between the instanton number and P(w2 )/2 should be an
          independent mod-2 degree-4 characteristic class w4 .
     16
          The authors thank Ho Tat Lam for noticing a small error in the previous version of the paper,
    where s was stated to be +1/4 for both N = 8d + 2 and N = 8d + 6. For more details, see the
    footnote in Sec. 2.3.5 of [59].

                                                      40
N odd: The periodicity of the θ-angle is 4π, P(w2 )/2 is determined by the instanton number,
        and there should not be an independent mod-2 degree-4 characteristic class w4 .
   Similarly, the periodicity of the θ-angle for SU (3)/Z3 and for E7 /Z2 is 6π and 4π, respec-
   tively, and there should not be an independent w4 mod 3 or mod 2, respectively. This is
   also true [61,62].
       It is straightforward to generalize this analysis to arbitrary semi-simple groups. The
                                   Q
   universal covering group G e =      e
                                     j Gj is the product of simple simply-connected groups,
                                                      Q
   and the gauge group G can be written as G = G/  e
                                                         i Zki . For each Zki , we have a Stiefel-
                           (i)
   Whitney class w2 defined mod ki . Then, the most general form of the θ-angles is
                       X                  X 2ni π P(w2 (i) )         X      2ni1 ,i2 π     (i )   (i )
                   i         θj ℓ j + i                        +i                         w2 1 · w2 2    (6.15)
                       j                   i
                                               ki      2             i <i
                                                                          gcd(ki1 , ki2 )
                                                                     1   2


   where θj ∼ θj + 2π, ni = 0, . . . , ki − 1, ni1 ,i2 = 0, . . . , gcd(ki1 , ki2 ) − 1, and the cup product
     (i )   (i )                                           (i ,i )
   w2 1 · w2 2 is taken after reducing both w2 1 2 modulo gcd(ki1 , ki2 ).

   6.2. θ-angles and line operators

        We want to understand how the values of the discrete θ-angles that we found above
   are related to the different choices of line operators, which we described in the previous
   sections. The analysis is essentially a generalization of the discussion in [44] of discrete
   electric and magnetic charges associated with the center of the gauge group, incorporating
                                                                 e k . The generalization to
   our discrete θ-angles. For simplicity we discuss the case G = G/Z
   G = Spin(4n)/Z2 × Z2 and to general semi-simple groups is straightforward.
        Consider the insertion of a straight line operator in R4 . The topology of spacetime in
   the presence of this line operator is S2 × (0, ∞)r × Rt . Here S2 is the sphere surrounding
   the line, r is the radial direction with appropriate boundary conditions at r → 0, ∞, and t
   is the direction along the line, which we view as the Euclidean time direction. The discrete
   magnetic charge carried by this line operator is given by
                                            Z
                                       m = 2 w2 ∈ Zk ,                                                   (6.16)
                                             S
   where m is precisely the magnetic charge zm of the line operator that we defined before.
        The discrete electric charge of this configuration should equal to the electric charge
   ze of the line operator. As defined in [44], it is given by the eigenvalue of a gauge trans-
   formation
                                   g : (0, ∞)r → G,        g(r = 0) = g(r = ∞) = 1                       (6.17)

                                                               41
which belongs to the homotopy class of the generator of π1 (G) = Zk . In the path integral
formalism, this is measured by the phase assigned to a gauge configuration on

                               S2 × (0, ∞)r × [0, β]t =: S2 × T2 ,                      (6.18)

where the configurations at t = 0 and t = β are identified by the gauge transformation
specified by m.
             b This is defined by having a G-bundle with
                                        Z
                                   m
                                   b =      w2 ∈ Zk .                                   (6.19)
                                         T2

We then have w2 = m[S2 ] + m[T
                           b 2 ] and
                                  Z
                                        P(w2 )
                                                  b ∈ Zk .
                                               = mm                                     (6.20)
                                      2
                                   S ×T   2
                                          2




With the generalized θ-angles (6.8) in the action, this gives the phase

                                                 n
                                              2πi mm.
                                                   b                                    (6.21)
                                                 k

This means that the discrete electric charge of the setup is nm ∈ Zk . Thus, the theory
with a discrete theta parameter n includes line operators with magnetic charge zm = m
and electric charge ze = nm mod k.
                                                   e = SU (N ) and kk ′ = N . Then the
      For concreteness let us set G = SU (N )/Zk , G
analysis so far says that the line operators with minimal magnetic charge have the charge
(ze , zm ) = (n, k ′ ) ∈ ZN × ZN , reproducing the charge lattice Ln in (2.1) when k = N , or
Lk,n in (2.8) in the general case. Therefore we see that the subscript n in (SU (N )/Zk )n
is indeed the coefficient n in the path integral phase (6.8).
      We can also repeat the same discussion in the Hamiltonian formalism of [44], putting
the theory on some spatial 3-manifold Y . In this formalism every two-cycle is associated
with a magnetic charge mi in Zk , associated with w2 , and every one-cycle is associated
with an electric charge ei in Zk , defined through a gauge transformation as above. The
Hilbert space is divided into sectors labeled by the discrete charges of all the one-cycles and
two-cycles. We claim that in a theory with given line operators, the Hilbert space includes
those sectors such that for every pair of a one-cycle and dual two-cycle, their charges
(ei , mi ) must be among the charges of the allowed line operators17 . This is because the

 17
      We do not discuss manifolds with torsion cycles here.

                                                42
insertion of a topologically trivial line operator with charges (ze , zm ) creates around it
charges (e, m) equal to those of the line operator as discussed above, while the insertion of
a line operator wrapped around a one-cycle shifts the associated (ei , mi ) by (ze , zm ). As
an example, the theory with gauge group Ge contains only the sectors (ei , mi = 0), while
the theory with gauge group G and index 0 contains only the sectors with Zk charges
(ei = 0, mi ).
     In [44], the Witten index of the pure N = 1 SYM theory was computed for all
simple gauge groups and for each sector (ei , mi ). If we want to count, say, the number of
supersymmetric vacua of the pure N = 1 SYM theory on R3 × S1 for one of the theories
that we described in the previous sections, we need to sum the Witten index over the
charges (e, m) (associated to the S1 and to the dual 2-cycle) that are in the list of charges
of allowed line operators. This precisely agrees with the counting of vacua that we derived
in the previous sections.
     To relate to our Euclidean discussion, we consider the same theory on Y × S1 . Every
one-cycle becomes a two-cycle when including the S1 , and the magnetic charge m
                                                                              b i on that
2-cycle is precisely the discrete Fourier transform of its electric charge ei . The phase coming
                                                               P
from the P(w2 ) term in the path integral is exactly 2πn i mi m       b i /k, which is equivalent
to saying that in the sector with magnetic charge mi we project onto the electric charge
ei = nmi . As we described above, in some cases we can replace the parameter n by
extending the range of the standard θ-angle, but in general it is not possible to do this.


6.3. Lattice of charges of line operators and θ-angles: the general case
                                                                                         Q
                                                                                    e
     To study the effect of the phases in the path integral in the general case G = G/     i Zki ,
including the case G = Spin(4d)/(Z2 × Z2 ), it is better to first study the most general
charge lattice.
    Let Ge =Q G er , where G
                           er are simple and simply-connected groups. Let Cr be the
                 r
          er . When G
center of G         er is Spin(4d), we need to decompose Cr = Z2 × Z2 . We write

                                            Y          Y
                                    C=          Cr =       Zas .                          (6.22)
                                            r          s


Take a subgroup
                                       Y                   Y
                                 H=         Zki ⊂ C =          Zas ,                      (6.23)
                                        i                  s


                                                 43
                                           e
and consider a theory with gauge group G = G/H. Note that Zki here can be various
nontrivial subgroups of combinations of Zas in (6.22). The charge of a line operator belongs
to a class
                                          (ze , zm ) ∈ C × C,                                     (6.24)

where we have

        ze = (n1 mod a1 , n2 mod a2 , . . .),         zm = (m1 mod a1 , m2 mod a2 , . . .).       (6.25)

We choose the basis of the magnetic charges so that the inner product determining the
mutual locality is
                                  X ns m′ − ms n′
                                             s              s
                                                                = 0 mod 1.                        (6.26)
                                    s
                                                 as

In view of (5.4), this means that we take, for example,

                                                                   e = Spin(8d + 4)),
              (n1 , n2 ; m1 , m2 ) = (ze,S , ze,C ; zm,S , zm,C ) (G
                                                                                                  (6.27)
                                                                   e = Spin(8d)).
              (n1 , n2 ; m1 , m2 ) = (ze,S , ze,C ; zm,C , zm,S ) (G
                                                                                                  Q
    Purely electric lines have charges ze ∈ Γ ⊂ C, where Γ is the set of classes where             i Zki
acts trivially. The mutual locality and the maximality of the set of the charges then require
                        Q
that zm in (6.24) is in i Zki ⊂ C. Denote the generator of Zki by gi ∈ C. For each i
there is a line with magnetic charge gi and we need to choose its electric charge νi ∈ C.
Since we can multiply by purely electric line operators, we can classify the allowed charges
                                                                              Q
νi modulo elements of Γ. These can be represented by an element of C/Γ = j Zkj , which
we denote by νij modulo kj . Recall, i labels the line and j labels which Zkj subgroup of
the H we are considering. These numbers completely specify the allowed charges. Next,
mutual locality requires that
                                          νij   νji
                                              =     mod 1.                                        (6.28)
                                          kj    ki
The general solution to this is given by

                 νij   νji      nij
                     =     =               ,            nij = 0, 1, . . . , gcd(kj , ki ) − 1.    (6.29)
                 kj    ki    gcd(kj , ki )

    Therefore, the most general choice of the set of charges of line operators is specified
by numbers

                ni ≡ νii = 0, 1, . . . , ki − 1,         nij = 0, 1, . . . , gcd(ki , kj ) − 1.   (6.30)

                                                       44
They nicely match the parameters in the most general phase in the path integral (6.15).
Repeating the analysis in section 6.2, it is easy to see that indeed the phase (6.15) repro-
duces the charges of the dyonic line operators described above.
    Let us verify that for G = Spin(N )/Z2 × Z2 (when N is divisible by 4) this repro-
duces our previous statements in section 5.3. The discrete θ-angles are given in (6.9), by
n11 , n12 = n21 , n22 , all taking the values 0 or 1. Using (6.27) and (6.26), we see that we
have line operators with charges

                      (n11 , n12 ; 1, 0),   (n21 , n11 ; 0, 1) (N = 8d + 4) ,
                                                                                              (6.31)
                      (n12 , n11 ; 1, 0),   (n22 , n21 ; 0, 1) (N = 8d) ,

which indeed satisfy the constraint (5.9). Also, the modulo-1 equality of the instanton
                                                                      (1)   (2)
number and the combination of the Stiefel-Whitney classes w2 , w2                 in (6.14) correctly
translate to the shift of the parameters nSS , nCS , nSC and nCC in (5.10).

6.4. Surface operators

    In our gauge theories we can also define various surface operators. The ones that are
most interesting for us are the ones associated with the center of the gauge group.
    Let us consider surface operators in a gauge group G with a nontrivial center C, for
example SU (N ) with its center ZN . We can define a surface operator associated with
every element g ∈ C. An insertion of this surface operator on some surface M is defined
by requiring that when we go around the surface and come back to the same point, the
gauge transformation parameter is multiplied by g. This is nontrivial, since the gauge
transformation involved is not periodic in G, but all the gauge invariant operators (local
operators and line operators) are still well-defined in the presence of this surface operator.
Every Wilson line is associated with a representation of G and hence an element in the
center g ′ ∈ C. The expectation value of a Wilson line with g ′ and a surface operator with g
then depends on their linking number q through a phase. For C = Zk it is exp(2πigg ′ q/k).
    Next, let us consider the surface operators when the gauge group G has a nontrivial
first homotopy group π1 (G), for example G = SU (N )/ZN . We can construct here a surface
operator that is S-dual to the one of the previous paragraph (see section 4.3 of [63]). In this
case there is a Stiefel-Whitney class w2 associated with bundles of this group, which gives
an element of the center when integrated over surfaces, and we can define an insertion of a
surface operator on M to modify the path integral by a phase; when π1 (G) = Zk this phase
          R
is exp(2πi M w2 /k). As in the previous paragraph, the expectation values of ’t Hooft lines

                                                 45
carrying center charges and of these surface operators depends on their linking number
through a phase (which is in Zk for π1 (G) = Zk ).
      We saw in the previous sections that in some cases we get at low energies discrete
Zk gauge theories. Such gauge theories have line operators and surface operators, labeled
by an element of Zk . They obey a similar relation to the one described in the previous
two paragraphs; the correlation function of a line operator and a surface operator has a
Zk phase given by the product of their charges and of the linking number of the line with
the surface. One way to realize such a discrete gauge theory is to have a 1-form potential
A and a 2-form potential B, with standard quantization of their fluxes (such that their
integrals over closed cycles are integer multiples of 2π), and with an action [35,12]
                                                    Z
                                           k
                                       S=                B ∧ dA.                           (6.32)
                                          2πi

In this realization, the Zk line operators are Wilson lines of A, and the Zk surface operators
are given by exponentials of integrals of B. When we flow from any of our gauge theories to
a Zk gauge theory, the basic line operator of that gauge theory becomes the line operator of
this Zk theory, and the surface operators described in the previous two paragraphs become
the surface operators of this Zk theory.
      We can use this discussion also to relate the different theories discussed above. For
instance, suppose we have an SU (N )/ZN theory and we want to turn it into an SU (N )
theory. We can couple the SU (N )/ZN theory to a ZN gauge theory (realized by A and B
fields as above), and add to the action a term
                                             Z
                                                 d4 xB ∧ w2 .                              (6.33)

The field B then serves as a Lagrange multiplier that sets the discrete magnetic charge to
zero18 . The magnetic line operators of the SU (N )/ZN theory are no longer allowed since
they are not gauge-invariant under gauge transformations of B, and the surface operators
of the SU (N )/ZN theory become trivial. On the other hand, we introduce new line and
surface operators from the ZN gauge theory, which behave like line and surface operators
of SU (N ). In a similar way, one can go from an SU (N ) theory to an SU (N )/ZN theory,
by coupling a ZN gauge theory such that the B field of the ZN theory makes the surface

 18
      Note that the equation of motion of A implies that B is flat, and that as in other places we
ignore possible issues related to torsion.

                                                    46
operators of the SU (N ) theory trivial. By similar manipulations we can relate all the
theories we discussed above (that have the same Lie algebra g), by coupling them to an
appropriate discrete gauge theory.

Acknowledgments
    We would like to thank T. Dumitrescu, G. Festuccia, D. Freed, D. Gaiotto, S. Gi-
acomelli, J. Gomis, K. Intriligator, T. Okuda, S. Razamat, M. Strassler, S. Sugimoto,
B. Willett, and E. Witten for many useful discussions. We would like to thank G. W. Moore
in particular, for helpful discussions and also for his detailed and thoughtful comments on
the draft. We would also like to thank Oren Bergman for pointing out an important typo
in a previous version of this paper. OA is the Samuel Sebba Professorial Chair of Pure
and Applied Physics, and he is supported in part by a grant from the Rosa and Emilio
Segre Research Award, by an Israel Science Foundation center for excellence grant, by the
German-Israeli Foundation (GIF) for Scientific Research and Development, and by the
Minerva foundation with funding from the Federal German Ministry for Education and
Research. OA gratefully acknowledges support from an IBM Einstein Fellowship at the
Institute for Advanced Study. The work of NS was supported in part by DOE grant DE-
FG02-90ER40542 and by the United States-Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF)
under grant number 2010/629. YT’s research is supported in part by MEXT/JSPS grant
KAKENHI-25870159, and in part by the WPI research initiative through IPMU, Univer-
sity of Tokyo. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in
this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding
agencies.

References
[1] O. Aharony, S. S. Razamat, N. Seiberg and B. Willett, “3d dualities from 4d dual-
    ities,” JHEP 1307, 149 (2013). [arXiv:1305.3924 [hep-th]]. O. Aharony, S. S. Raza-
    mat, N. Seiberg and B. Willett,“3d dualities from 4d dualities for orthogonal groups,”
    [arXiv:1307.0511 [hep-th]].
[2] N. Seiberg, “Electric–magnetic duality in supersymmetric nonAbelian gauge theories,”
    Nucl. Phys. B 435, 129 (1995). [hep-th/9411149].
[3] K. A. Intriligator and N. Seiberg, “Duality, monopoles, dyons, confinement and oblique
    confinement in supersymmetric SO(Nc ) gauge theories,” Nucl. Phys. B 444, 125
    (1995). [hep-th/9503179].
[4] P. Goddard, J. Nuyts and D. I. Olive, “Gauge Theories and Magnetic Charge,” Nucl.
    Phys. B 125, 1 (1977).

                                             47
 [5] A. Kapustin, “Wilson-’t Hooft operators in four-dimensional gauge theories and S-
     duality,” Phys. Rev. D 74, 025005 (2006). [hep-th/0501015].
 [6] A. Kapustin and N. Saulina, “The Algebra of Wilson-’t Hooft operators,” Nucl. Phys.
     B 814, 327 (2009). [arXiv:0710.2097 [hep-th]].
 [7] D. Gaiotto, G. W. Moore and A. Neitzke, “Framed BPS States,” [arXiv:1006.0146
     [hep-th]].
 [8] N. Drukker, D. R. Morrison and T. Okuda, “Loop operators and S-duality from curves
     on Riemann surfaces,” JHEP 0909, 031 (2009). [arXiv:0907.2593 [hep-th]].
 [9] C. Vafa, “Modular Invariance and Discrete Torsion on Orbifolds,” Nucl. Phys. B 273,
     592 (1986).
[10] C. Vafa and E. Witten, “On orbifolds with discrete torsion,” J. Geom. Phys. 15, 189
     (1995). [hep-th/9409188].
[11] N. Seiberg, “Modifying the Sum Over Topological Sectors and Constraints on Super-
     gravity,” JHEP 1007, 070 (2010). [arXiv:1005.0002 [hep-th]].
[12] T. Banks and N. Seiberg, “Symmetries and Strings in Field Theory and Gravity,”
     Phys. Rev. D 83, 084019 (2011). [arXiv:1011.5120 [hep-th]].
[13] T. Pantev and E. Sharpe, “GLSM’s for gerbes (and other toric stacks),” Adv. Theor.
     Math. Phys. 10, 77 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0502053].
[14] T. Pantev and E. Sharpe, “Notes on gauging noneffective group actions,” arXiv:hep-
     th/0502027.
[15] A. Caldararu, J. Distler, S. Hellerman, T. Pantev and E. Sharpe, “Non-birational
     twisted derived equivalences in abelian GLSMs,” arXiv:0709.3855 [hep-th].
[16] F. Cachazo, N. Seiberg and E. Witten, “Phases of N = 1 supersymmetric gauge
     theories and matrices,” JHEP 0302, 042 (2003). [hep-th/0301006].
[17] K. Konishi and Y. Ookouchi, “On Confinement Index,” Nucl. Phys. B 827, 59 (2010).
     [arXiv:0909.3781 [hep-th]].
[18] K. A. Intriligator and N. Seiberg, “Lectures on supersymmetric gauge theories
     and electric–magnetic duality,” Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 45BC, 1 (1996). [hep-
     th/9509066].
[19] N. Seiberg and E. Witten, “Electric-magnetic duality, monopole condensation, and
     confinement in N = 2 supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 426, 19
     (1994), [Erratum-ibid. B 430, 485 (1994)]. [hep-th/9407087].
[20] N. J. Evans, S. D. H. Hsu and M. Schwetz, “Phase transitions in softly broken N=2
     SQCD at nonzero theta angle,” Nucl. Phys. B 484, 124 (1997). [hep-th/9608135].
[21] K. Konishi, “Confinement, supersymmetry breaking and theta parameter dependence
     in the Seiberg-Witten model,” Phys. Lett. B 392, 101 (1997). [hep-th/9609021].
[22] G. ’t Hooft, “Topology of the Gauge Condition and New Confinement Phases in
     Nonabelian Gauge Theories,” Nucl. Phys. B 190, 455 (1981).

                                           48
[23] T. Banks and E. Rabinovici, “Finite Temperature Behavior of the Lattice Abelian
     Higgs Model,” Nucl. Phys. B 160, 349 (1979).
[24] E. H. Fradkin and S. H. Shenker, “Phase Diagrams of Lattice Gauge Theories with
     Higgs Fields,” Phys. Rev. D 19, 3682 (1979).
[25] N. Seiberg and E. Witten, “Gauge dynamics and compactification to three-dimensions,”
     In Saclay 1996, The mathematical beauty of physics 333-366. [hep-th/9607163].
[26] M. Henningson, “Wilson-’t Hooft operators and the theta angle,” JHEP 0605, 065
     (2006). [hep-th/0603188].
[27] C. Vafa and E. Witten, “A strong coupling test of S duality,” Nucl. Phys. B 431, 3
     (1994). [hep-th/9408074].
[28] S. Gukov and E. Witten, “Gauge Theory, Ramification, And The Geometric Langlands
     Program,” [hep-th/0612073].
[29] L. Girardello, A. Giveon, M. Porrati and A. Zaffaroni, “S duality in N=4 Yang-Mills
     theories with general gauge groups,” Nucl. Phys. B 448, 127 (1995). [hep-th/9502057].
[30] S. Wu, “S-duality in Vafa-Witten theory for non-simply laced gauge groups,” JHEP
     0805, 009 (2008). [arXiv:0802.2047 [hep-th]].
[31] J. M. Maldacena, “The Large N limit of superconformal field theories and supergrav-
     ity,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2, 231 (1998). [hep-th/9711200].
[32] O. Aharony and E. Witten, “Anti-de Sitter space and the center of the gauge group,”
     JHEP 9811, 018 (1998). [hep-th/9807205].
[33] E. Witten, “AdS / CFT correspondence and topological field theory,” JHEP 9812,
     012 (1998). [hep-th/9812012].
[34] O. Aharony, S. S. Gubser, J. M. Maldacena, H. Ooguri and Y. Oz, “Large N field
     theories, string theory and gravity,” Phys. Rept. 323, 183 (2000). [hep-th/9905111].
[35] J. M. Maldacena, G. W. Moore and N. Seiberg, “D-brane charges in five-brane back-
     grounds,” JHEP 0110, 005 (2001). [hep-th/0108152].
[36] D. Belov and G. W. Moore, “Conformal blocks for AdS5 singletons,” [hep-th/0412167].
[37] O. J. Ganor, “Six-dimensional tensionless strings in the large N limit,” Nucl. Phys. B
     489, 95 (1997). [hep-th/9605201].
[38] G. Segal, “The definition of conformal field theory,” unpublished preprint from late
     1980s, reprinted in Topology, geometry and quantum field theory, London Math. Soc.
     Lecture Note 308 421–577, 2004.
[39] G. W. Moore, “Anomalies, Gauss laws, and Page charges in M-theory,” Comptes
     Rendus Physique 6, 251 (2005). [hep-th/0409158].
[40] E. Witten, “Geometric Langlands From Six Dimensions,” [arXiv:0905.2720 [hep-th]].
[41] D. S. Freed and C. Teleman, “Relative quantum field theory,” [arXiv:1212.1692 [hep-
     th]].
[42] G. Moore, “Overview of the theory of self-dual fields” and “The RR charge of an
     orientifold”, which are available through http://www.physics.rutgers.edu/˜gmoore/ .

                                            49
[43] N. Seiberg and W. Taylor, “Charge Lattices and Consistency of 6D Supergravity,”
     JHEP 1106, 001 (2011). [arXiv:1103.0019 [hep-th]].
[44] E. Witten, “Supersymmetric index in four-dimensional gauge theories,” Adv. Theor.
     Math. Phys. 5, 841 (2002). [hep-th/0006010].
[45] K. A. Intriligator and N. Seiberg, “Phases of N = 1 supersymmetric gauge theories
     and electric-magnetic triality,” In Los Angeles 1995, Future perspectives in string
     theory 270-282. [hep-th/9506084].
[46] M. J. Strassler, “Duality, phases, spinors and monopoles in SO(N ) and spin(N ) gauge
     theories,” JHEP 9809, 017 (1998). [hep-th/9709081].
[47] P. C. Argyres, M. R. Plesser and N. Seiberg, “The Moduli space of vacua of N=2
     SUSY QCD and duality in N=1 SUSY QCD,” Nucl. Phys. B 471, 159 (1996). [hep-
     th/9603042].
[48] P. C. Argyres, M. R. Plesser and A. D. Shapere, “N=2 moduli spaces and N=1
     dualities for SO(nc ) and U Sp(2nc ) superQCD,” Nucl. Phys. B 483, 172 (1997). [hep-
     th/9608129].
[49] M. Shifman and A. Yung, “Confronting Seiberg’s Duality with r Duality in N = 1
     Supersymmetric QCD,” Phys. Rev. D 86, 065003 (2012). [arXiv:1204.4164 [hep-th]].
[50] M. Shifman and A. Yung, “Detailing N=1 Seiberg’s Duality through the Seiberg-
     Witten Solution of N=2,” [arXiv:1304.0822 [hep-th]].
[51] P. C. Argyres, A. Kapustin and N. Seiberg, “On S-duality for non-simply-laced gauge
     groups,” JHEP 0606, 043 (2006). [hep-th/0603048].
[52] E. Witten, “Baryons and branes in anti-de Sitter space,” JHEP 9807, 006 (1998).
     [hep-th/9805112].
[53] A. Hanany and B. Kol, “On orientifolds, discrete torsion, branes and M theory,” JHEP
     0006, 013 (2000). [hep-th/0003025].
[54] K. A. Intriligator and P. Pouliot, “Exact superpotentials, quantum vacua and dual-
     ity in supersymmetric Sp(Nc ) gauge theories,” Phys. Lett. B 353, 471 (1995). [hep-
     th/9505006].
[55] E. Thomas, “On the Cohomology of the Real Grassmann Complexes and the Char-
     acteristic Classes of n-Plane Bundles,” Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 96, 67–89 (1960)
[56] R. Dijkgraaf and E. Witten, “Topological Gauge Theories and Group Cohomology,”
     Commun. Math. Phys. 129, 393 (1990).
[57] A. Dold and H. Whitney, “Classification of oriented sphere bundles over a 4-complex,”
     Ann. of Math. 2nd Ser. 69, 667–677 (1959)
[58] W. Browder and E. Thomas, “Axioms for the generalized Pontryagin cohomology
     operations,” Quart. J. Math. Oxford, 2nd ser., 13 55–60 (1962)
[59] C. Cordova, D. S. Freed, H. T. Lam and N. Seiberg, “Anomalies in the Space of
     Coupling Constants and Their Dynamical Applications II,” [arXiv:1905.13361 [hep-
     th]].

                                            50
[60] A. Borel, “Sur L’Homologie et la Cohomologie des Groupes de Lie Compacts Con-
     nexes,” Jour. Amer. Math. 76, 273–342 (1954)
[61] A. Kono, M. Mimura, and N. Shimada, “Cohomology of classifying spaces of certain
     associative H-spaces,” J. Math. Kyoto. U. 15 607–617 (1975)
[62] A. Kono, and M. Mimura, “On the cohomology mod 2 of the classifying space of
     AdE7 ,” J. Math. Kyoto. U. 18 535–541 (1978)
[63] S. Gukov and E. Witten, “Rigid Surface Operators,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 14
     (2010). [arXiv:0804.1561 [hep-th]].




                                         51
