                                                                                                                             LYCEN-2016-04
                                                                                                                             LA-UR-16-23055




                                         The Energy-Momentum Tensor(s) in Classical Gauge Theories

                                                         Daniel N. Blaschke∗, François Gieres†, Méril Reboud†‡,
                                                                         and Manfred Schweda§

                                                                                 June 29, 2016

                                                                      ∗ Los Alamos National Laboratory,

                                                                        Los Alamos, NM, 87545, (USA)
                                                                  † Institut de Physique Nucléaire de Lyon,
arXiv:1605.01121v2 [hep-th] 6 Jul 2016




                                                Université de Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1 and CNRS/IN2P3,
                                                    Bat. P. Dirac, 4 rue Enrico Fermi, F-69622-Villeurbanne (France)
                                                                     ‡ Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon,

                                                             46 allée d’Italie, F-69364-Lyon CEDEX 07 (France)
                                                    § Institute for Theoretical Physics, Vienna University of Technology

                                                            Wiedner Hauptstraße 8-10, A-1040 Vienna (Austria)

                                         E-mail: dblaschke@lanl.gov, gieres@ipnl.in2p3.fr, meril.reboud@ens-lyon.fr,
                                                                  mschweda@tph.tuwien.ac.at



                                                                 Dedicated to the memory of Raymond Stora
                                         who made profound and lasting contributions to field theory and to symmetries in physics



                                                                                    Abstract
                                                We give an introduction to, and review of, the energy-momentum tensors in classical
                                            gauge field theories in Minkowski space, and to some extent also in curved space-time. For
                                            the canonical energy-momentum tensor of non-Abelian gauge fields and of matter fields
                                            coupled to such fields, we present a new and simple improvement procedure based on gauge
                                            invariance for constructing a gauge invariant, symmetric energy-momentum tensor. The
                                            relationship with the Einstein-Hilbert tensor following from the coupling to a gravitational
                                            field is also discussed.
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                    1

2 EMT’s for gauge theories in Minkowski space                                                3
  2.1 Canonical EMT and its properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
      2.1.1 The canonical EMT and the associated conserved charges . . . . . . . . . 3
      2.1.2 Superpotential terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
      2.1.3 The canonical EMT for pure YM theory and its general properties . . . . 5
      2.1.4 Improvements of the canonical EMT and definition of the physical EMT . 6
  2.2 Improvement of the canonical EMT’s in gauge theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
      2.2.1 Belinfante’s procedure for constructing a symmetric EMT . . . . . . . . . 7
      2.2.2 Improvement procedure for constructing a gauge invariant EMT . . . . . 9
  2.3 Assessment concerning the improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

3 Einstein-Hilbert EMT in Minkowski space                                                         13
  3.1 Motivation and procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      13
  3.2 Fields in curved space-time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     15
      3.2.1 General framework and dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          15
      3.2.2 EMT for matter/gauge fields coupled to a dynamical gravitational field .              17
      3.2.3 EMT for matter/gauge fields coupled to an external gravitational field . .            18
  3.3 Einstein-Hilbert’s EMT for matter/gauge fields in Minkowski space . . . . . . . .           19
  3.4 Case of spinor fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21
  3.5 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     22

4 On the quantum theory: Noether’s theorem and Ward identities                                    22

5 Ward identities, their “cousins and descendants”: on (the work of) Raymond
  Stora                                                                      23

A Gauge field theories in a nutshell                                                              25


1    Introduction
The role and impact of symmetries in modern physics can hardly be overstated. As H. Weyl [1]
put it: “As far as I see, all a priori statements in physics have their origin in symmetry”. Some
salient features are the following ones [2]:

    • The laws of nature are possible realizations of the symmetries of nature.
    • The basic quantities or building blocks of physical theories are often defined and classified
      by virtue of symmetry considerations, e.g. elementary particles and relativistic fields.
    • The general structure of physical theories is largely determined by the underlying invari-
      ances. In particular, the form of interactions is strongly restricted by geometric symme-
      tries (relativistic covariance) and the gauge symmetries essentially fix all fundamental
      interactions (electro-weak, strong and gravitational forces).




                                                 1
A pillar of classical mechanics and field theory is given by the two theorems that E. Noether
established in 1918 [3]. They describe in quite general terms the consequences of the invariance
of an action functional under a Lie group of global or local symmetry transformations, respec-
tively, extending and generalizing some special cases which had previously been investigated, in
particular by F. Klein in relationship with general relativity, e.g. see [4–7] and references therein.
These two theorems can be applied to systems with a finite number of degrees of freedom (me-
chanics) as well as to systems with an infinite number of degrees of freedom (field theory), both
in their relativistic or non-relativistic versions, e.g. see reference [8] for numerous examples.
They can also be generalized to superspace [9, 10] or to non-commutative space (see [11] and
references therein).

Plan of the paper: In the present note we focus, for classical YM (Yang-Mills) theories in n-
dimensional Minkowski space, on the EMT (energy-momentum tensor, also referred to as stress-
energy tensor or stress tensor for short): the components T µν of the EMT can be interpreted as
follows, e.g. see reference [12]. T 00 represents the energy density, T 0i the i-momentum density
(or energy flux density) and T ij the i-momentum flux density in the j-direction. Regarding
the field theoretical system as a collection of particles, we can also interpret T ii ≡ p as the
pressure and (T ij ) with i 6= j as the shear stress. In particular, we will study here the so-called
canonical EMT whose components Tcan       µν represent the conserved current densities which are

associated (by virtue of Noether’s first theorem) to the invariance      of the action under space-
time translations. The corresponding conserved charges P ≡ Rn−1 dn−1 x Tcan
                                                               ν                   0ν define the total
                                                                   R

energy and momentum of the physical system.
    As is well known (for instance for Maxwell’s theory), the tensor Tcan    µν is neither symmetric

nor gauge invariant in general and thereby needs to be “improved”. This is traditionally real-
ized by the “symmetrization procedure of Belinfante” [13, 14] which relies on the spin angular
momentum density, but this method does not work straightforwardly in the case where matter
fields are minimally coupled to a gauge field [15]. After a short introduction to the subject and
problematics in subsection 2.1, we will show in subsection 2.2 that the improvement can be
realized in a simple manner for pure gauge fields or for interacting gauge and matter fields by
taking into account the local gauge invariance1 . A conceptually quite different approach consists
of coupling the gauge and matter fields to gravity and deducing the so-called Einstein-Hilbert
EMT in Minkowski space from the metric EMT on curved space. This approach is outlined for
YM theories in section 3 and it is readily shown that the different results in Minkowski space
coincide with each other. Concerning the latter point we should mention that more general and
abstract approaches have been considered in the literature (we refer in particular to the system-
atic study [17] based on the earlier work [18]), but we hope that the elementary discussion of the
different aspects presented here is useful both as a short introduction to, and as an overview of,
the subject. While our paper is devoted to the classical theory, we conclude with some remarks
on how symmetries impact the quantum theory, i.e. on Ward identities, and more generally on
the related subjects to which R. Stora made substantial contributions.
   1
    In the older literature (e.g. see reference [16]), the local, i.e. space-time dependent, gauge transformations
are often referred to as gauge transformations of the second kind as opposed to gauge transformations of the first
kind, i.e. global gauge transformations (labeled by constant parameters). To avoid a topological connotation, some
authors also use the terminology flexible versus rigid symmetry transformations for transformations involving
x-dependent symmetry parameters versus constant ones. By gauge invariance we shall always mean local gauge
invariance.




                                                        2
General framework of classical Lagrangian field theory in Minkowski space: Our
conventions and general assumptions are as follows. We choose natural units so that c ≡ 1 ≡ ~.
The points of n-dimensional Minkowski space are labeled by x ≡ (xµ )µ=0,1,...,n−1 ≡ (t, ~x ) ∈ Rn
and the signature of the Minkowski metric (ηµν ) is chosen to be (+, −, . . . , −). We will deal only
with YM theories, i.e. multiplets of complex scalar or Dirac fields which are minimally coupled
to the YM field Aµ (x) ≡ Aµa (x)Ta (see appendix A for the notation and for a summary of gauge
theories). Thus, generically we have a collection ϕ ≡ (ϕr )r=1,...,N of classical relativistic fields in
Minkowski space which are assumed to vanish (together with their derivatives) sufficiently fast at
spatial infinity.
        R n
                  The dynamics of fields is specified by a local, Poincaré invariant action functional
S[ϕ] ≡ d x L(ϕ, ∂µ ϕ) which involves a Lagrangian density L having the following properties.
We consider closed systems which means [19] that the Lagrangian L does not explicitly depend
on the space-time coordinates, i.e. the x-dependence of L is only due to the x-dependence of ϕ
and ∂µ ϕ. Moreover, we assume that L depends at most on first-order derivatives: the associated
equations of motion
                                                                    !
                                     δS   ∂L                ∂L
                                  0=    =    − ∂µ                       ,                            (1.1)
                                     δϕ   ∂ϕ              ∂(∂µ ϕ)

are then at most of second order. We concentrate on the Lagrangian formulation of field theory
and refer to the work [20, 21] for a discussion of the EMT of gauge theories within the Hamil-
tonian framework. Moreover in section 3, we discuss the generalization to curved space-time
manifolds.


2     EMT’s for gauge theories in Minkowski space
After recalling the definition of the canonical EMT [15, 19, 22], we consider the example of pure
YM theories (while referring whenever necessary to the summary of non-Abelian gauge theories
given in appendix A). Thereafter, we discuss the general properties of the EMT (local conser-
vation law, symmetry, gauge invariance, tracelessness) as well as the addition of superpotential
terms to the canonical EMT: The aim of these additions is to “improve” the characteristics of
the canonical EMT, so that it becomes symmetric and gauge invariant (and traceless for scale
invariant Lagrangians) if it does not have these properties.

2.1     Canonical EMT and its properties
2.1.1    The canonical EMT and the associated conserved charges
Noether’s first theorem: By virtue of Noether’s first theorem, the invariance of the action
S[ϕ] under translations xν → x0ν = xν + aν implies the existence of current densities (jcan   µ )ν
                                     µ )ν = 0 for ν ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n − 1}. The conserved second-
satisfying the conservation law ∂µ (jcan
               µν      µ   ν
rank tensor Tcan ≡ (jcan ) is referred to as the canonical EMT field and with the notation
δxµ = aµ , δϕ = −aµ ∂µ ϕ (where |aµ |  1) we have

         δS                                                                   ∂L
    0=      δϕ + ∂µ j µ       with     j µ ≡ −Tcan
                                               µν
                                                   aν            µν
                                                                Tcan ≡              ∂ ν ϕ − η µν L . (2.1)
         δϕ                                                                 ∂(∂µ ϕ)

                                         µν and in similar expressions, the sum over all fields
In this expression for the tensor field Tcan
is implicitly understood (e.g. the sum over φ and φ∗ in the case of a complex scalar field φ).

                                                   3
                                 µν = 0 holds by virtue of the equations of motion of ϕ and its
The local conservation law ∂µ Tcan
                                                           µν [19]:
explicit verification amounts to a one-line derivation of Tcan
                                         ∂L                           ∂L                     ∂L         
          ∂µ (η µν L) = ∂ ν L =                        ∂ν ϕ +               ∂ ν (∂µ ϕ) = ∂µ          ∂ν ϕ .
                                         ∂ϕ                         ∂(∂µ ϕ) | {z }           ∂(∂µ ϕ)
                                     | {z }                                 = ∂µ (∂ ν ϕ)
                                           ∂L
                                  = ∂µ   ∂(∂µ ϕ)


   If we assumeR as usual that the fields vanish sufficiently fast at spatial infinity, then the
boundary term dn−1 x ∂i Tcan
                          iν vanishes and we have conserved “charges”

                                                        Z
                                              Pν ≡                  dn−1 x Tcan
                                                                            0ν
                                                                                                              (2.2)
                                                         Rn−1

associated with the conserved densities (2.1). The vector (P ν ) represents the total energy-
momentum of the fields and generates space-time translations of the fields ϕ in classical and
in quantum theory. (Some subtleties appear for gauge theories due to the presence of so-called
constraint equations following from the gauge invariance of the Lagrangian, see references [20,
21].) In particular P 0 coincides with the canonical Hamiltonian function H since Tcan 00 = ∂L ϕ̇ −
                        R n−1                                                               ∂ ϕ̇
L = H. The fact that V d           0ν
                                x Tcan represents the components of a Lorentz vector for any space
region V ⊂ Rn−1 (a result which is also known as von Laue’s theorem [23]) is not quite obvious,
but can be verified [24] by using the assumptions that ∂µ Tcanµν = 0 and that the functions T µν
                                                                                                 can
vanish sufficiently fast at the boundary of V . We note that the integral (2.2) is performed over a
hypersurface of Rn given by x0 constant which can be replaced by a generic (n − 1)-dimensional
space-like hypersurface Σ with fields vanishing on its boundary ∂Σ.

Other derivations: We note that the canonical Noether currents associated to geometric
symmetries can also be obtained [25] by considering local symmetry transformations without
coupling the fields to a gravitational field (and similarly for internal symmetries without a
coupling of matter fields to a gauge field). This approach may be referred to as Gell-Mann-Lévy
procedure [26] since it goes back to the classic work of Gell-Mann and Lévy on the σ-model [27].

2.1.2   Superpotential terms
Apart from an overall numerical factor, there are other ambiguities in the definition of a canon-
ical current. In fact, for the canonical EMT we can always add a so-called superpotential term,
i.e. the divergence of an antisymmetric tensor, so as to pass over to a so-called improved EMT
  µν
Timp  defined by2

                         µν    µν
                       Timp ≡ Tcan + ∂ρ χµρν                ,         with     χµρν = −χρµν    .              (2.3)

The antisymmetry of χµρν in its first two indices ensures that ∂ρ χµρν is identically conserved,
        µν
hence Timp  is conserved as well. The derivative in the superpotential term entails that one
has the same conserved charge as for Tcanµν provided χ0iν decreases for r ≡ |~  x | → ∞ faster
than 1/r n−2  in n space-time dimensions. The freedom (2.3) may be used to give a different
form (eventually with a greater physical significance) to the EMT, various examples for this
“improvement procedure” (i.e. judicious choices of superpotentials) being given below.
  2
    One may regret that some monographs (e.g. [16]) refer to (2.3) as “the canonical EMT” since χµρν and
          µν
thereby Timp are neither unique nor naturally given.


                                                                4
2.1.3    The canonical EMT for pure YM theory and its general properties
Canonical expression: By way of example, for pure YM theory in n dimensions, the trans-
lation invariance of the YM action (A.9), i.e. Lg (F ) ≡ − 4c12 Tr (F µν Fµν ), yields

                             µν      1                    1
                            Tcan =      Tr (−F µρ ∂ ν Aρ + η µν F ρσ Fρσ ) .                       (2.4)
                                     c2                   4
According to Noether’s first theorem, this EMT is locally conserved, i.e. ∂µ Tcan µν = 0, by virtue
                                νµ        νµ           νµ
of the field equation 0 = Dν F ≡ ∂ν F + iq [Aν , F ] where q denotes the non-Abelian charge
(cf. appendix A). As for any EMT some other properties are also of interest: one may wonder
whether it is gauge invariant (since we are dealing with gauge theories), whether it is symmetric
in its indices, whether it is traceless and whether it gives rise to a positive energy density. As a
matter of fact, the EMT (2.4) enjoys none of these properties. The physical and mathematical
ideas behind these four properties are the following ones, ignoring for the moment the coupling
to gravity which we address in the next subsection.

On the gauge invariance of the EMT: The lack of gauge invariance of the components
of the classical EMT is unacceptable
                           R n−1
                                         since these physical quantities are measurable; and so
is the energy-momentum V d         x Tcan (contained in a domain V ⊂ Rn−1 of finite volume)
                                      0ν

which is not on-shell gauge invariant (i.e. not gauge invariant for fields ϕ satisfying the classical
equations of motion).

On the symmetry of the EMT: If the EMT Tcan        µν is not symmetric on-shell, then the
                                     µνρ
canonical angular momentum tensor Mcan and the EMT Tcan µν are not related in the same way

as angular momentum and momentum are related in classical mechanics, i.e. by a relation of
the form “the components of M are the moments of T ”,

                                      M µρσ = xρ T µσ − xσ T µρ .                                  (2.5)

Indeed for a tensor M µρσ of this form, the conservation law ∂µ M µρσ = 0 only holds if the tensor
T µν is symmetric on-shell:

                         0 = ∂µ M µρσ = ∂µ (xρ T µσ − xσ T µρ ) = T ρσ − T σρ ,                    (2.6)

where we used the fact that ∂µ T µν = 0 holds for solutions of the equations of motion. Thus,
if the canonical EMT is not symmetric, then the canonical angular momentum tensor does not
have the ‘mechanical’ form (2.5), rather we have an extra spin angular momentum term sµρσ ,

         µρσ                                                   ∂L    1
        Mcan = xρ Tcan
                   µσ
                       − xσ Tcan
                             µρ
                                 + sµρσ ,     with sµρσ ≡           ( Σρσ ) ϕ = −sµσρ .            (2.7)
                                                             ∂(∂µ ϕ) 2

Here, 2i Σρσ ≡ d(Mρσ ) is a N -dimensional representation d of a basis (Mρσ ) of the Lie algebra
associated to the Lorentz group, e.g. d(Mρσ ) = 0 for a scalar field, d(Mρσ ) ≡ Mρσ for a vector
field (Aµ ) and d(Mρσ ) ≡ 81 [γρ , γσ ] for a Dirac field (γ0 , . . . , γd−1 denoting matrices satisfying
the Clifford algebra relation {γρ , γσ } = 2ηρσ 1).




                                                   5
On the tracelessness of the EMT: Consider a field theoretic model which is invariant
under rescalings x     x0 = eρ x (where ρ is a constant real parameter), e.g. pure YM theory in
four dimensions or the theory of a real massless scalar field φ. For such a model, one expects
                                                                                       µν
that the canonical EMT can be improved so as to obtain a “new improved” EMT Tconf          which
is conserved, symmetric and traceless [28, 29]: the dilatation current (j µ ) associated to scale
invariance is then given by the moments of the EMT and its local conservation law (reflecting
the scale invariance) is tantamount to the tracelessness of the EMT:
                                     µν                             µ
                           j µ = xν Tconf ,      hence    ∂µ j µ = Tconf µ = 0.                       (2.8)

This tracelessness of the EMT plays an important role in conformal field theories [30]. Here, we
only note that for a single, real, massless scalar field φ in n-dimensional Minkowski space, the
new improved or Callan-Coleman-Jackiw EMT [28] reads
       µν      µν                                                                      1 n−2
      Tconf ≡ Tcan − ξ(n) (∂ µ ∂ ν − η µν )φ2      with  ≡ ∂ µ ∂µ     and ξ(n) ≡           .        (2.9)
                                                                                       4 n−1

On the positivity of the energy density: An interesting question is whether or not the
total energy P 0 is positive or, more importantly (the energy being only determined up to an
additive constant in the absence of gravity), whether the total energy is bounded from below.
In fact, if this is not the case, then one can extract an infinite amount of energy from the
physical system. If the energy density T 00 satisfies the positivity condition T 00 ≥ 0 in all
inertial frames, then the energy P 0 is positive in all inertial frames if |P~ | ≤ P 0 , i.e. equivalently
if the vector P ≡ (P 0 , P~ ) is time-like and future-directed3 [31]. The latter condition is satisfied
if the EMT satisfies the so-called dominant energy condition [32] stipulating that the energy
current E µ ≡ T µ ν uν is time-like and future-directed for every observer with velocity (uµ ) (e.g.
consider (uµ ) = (1, ~0 )). The energy conditions reflect the principles of relativity and play an
important role in general relativity where relations of this type are an essential ingredient for
establishing general results like the no hair theorem, the laws of black hole thermodynamics or
the singularity theorems of Penrose and Hawking which predict the occurrence of singularities
in the universe [33–36].

2.1.4    Improvements of the canonical EMT and definition of the physical EMT
Improvements of the canonical EMT: In view of the unpleasant and problematic proper-
ties (lack of symmetry and of gauge invariance) of the canonical EMT some improvements of the
canonical expression (2.1) have been looked for. The first one is due to Belinfante [13] and rep-
resents an astute procedure for constructing a symmetric EMT out of the canonical expression
— see section 2.2.1. In section 2.2.2 we will show that, for non-Abelian gauge theories, the same
results can be obtained by taking into account the gauge invariance of the Lagrangian. (Equiv-
alently, one can already exploit this gauge invariance in establishing Noether’s first theorem for
the translational invariance so as to obtain right away a gauge invariant (and symmetric) EMT,
see references [37–39] as well as [40]; we also note that a symmetric EMT can be obtained in
establishing Noether’s theorem if one considers both translations and Lorentz transformations
in an appropriate way [41].) We mentioned already that for scale invariant theories a further im-
provement, which is due to Callan, Coleman and Jackiw [28], consists of constructing a traceless
EMT out of Belinfante’s symmetric tensor.
  3                                                                                        ~ · ~v ) with γ ≡
    Under a Lorentz boost with velocity ~v , the component P 0 goes over to P 00 = γ(P 0 − P
       2 −1/2          0                     00
(1 − ~v )     , hence P ≥ 0 does not imply P ≥ 0 without the given assumption.


                                                     6
Definition of the physical EMT: The canonical EMT and its improvements represent
different localizations for the energy and momentum, and one may wonder whether there is
a preferred or a correct localization. An answer to this question can be provided by coupling
the matter fields (including gauge fields) to the gravitational field. In fact, in general relativity
the EMT represents the local source for the gravitational field in Einstein’s field equations
very much like the electric current density represents the source for the electromagnetic field
in Maxwell’s equations. Thus, in curved space-time, one defines the so-called metric EMT for
the gauge or matter field as the functional derivative of the gauge/matter field action S[ϕ, gµν ]
with respect to the metric tensor field (gµν ), see section 3 below. Accordingly, this curved space
EMT is generally covariant, covariantly conserved, symmetric and gauge invariant. The so-
                                 µν
called Einstein-Hilbert EMT TEH     in Minkowski space which is obtained from the metric EMT
by setting gµν = ηµν is then conserved, symmetric and gauge invariant by construction.
    As was pointed out by Rosenfeld [42] and Belinfante [14] (and as we will discuss in sub-
section 3.3), this conceptually quite different approach yields, in the flat space limit of the
minimal coupling to gravity, Belinfante’s symmetric EMT whose construction does not make
any reference to gravity. (In particular one recovers the canonical EMT if this one is already
symmetric. We note that Belinfante’s symmetric EMT admits a natural geometric formulation
if gravity is viewed as a gauge theory of the Poincaré group, see references [15, 43].) One can
also recover the traceless Callan-Coleman-Jackiw EMT in the flat space limit of a conformally
invariant field theory on curved space.

Summary: If one takes for granted that Einstein’s general relativity is the correct theory
for the gravitational field, then the EMT of gauge and/or matter fields in Minkowski space
should not only be conserved and gauge invariant, but it should also be symmetric and naturally
generalizable to a generally covariant tensor in curved space. Yet, we should note that within
certain alternative theories of gravity like Einstein-Cartan theory [43–45], the canonical EMT
appears naturally. In particular, non symmetric EMT’s which do exist for certain classical spin
fluids can consistently be coupled to gravity in this framework, see [46] and references therein.
Concerning the validity of the different theories of gravity we note that Einstein-Cartan theory is
considered to be a viable alternative to general relativity: both theories can only be distinguished
at very high densities or at very small distances which are currently beyond experimental reach
— see [46] and references therein.
    The canonical and the improved (or Einstein-Hilbert-) EMT’s only differ by a total derivative
so that they yield the same conserved charges P ν and it is the latter which play a fundamental
role in classical and quantum field theories on flat space [20, 21]: They appear for instance in
the defining axioms of Wightman and of Haag and Kastler for quantum field theory [47, 48].

2.2     Improvement of the canonical EMT’s in gauge theories
2.2.1    Belinfante’s procedure for constructing a symmetric EMT
General procedure: The concern of Belinfante [13, 14] was to construct an improved EMT
which is symmetric in its indices for any relativistically invariant field theory. The resulting
         µν
tensor Timp which is also referred to as the Belinfante(-Rosenfeld) tensor, is obtained by choosing
the superpotential appearing in equation (2.3) to be given by
                                         1
                                 χµρν = − (sµρν − sνµρ + sρνµ ) ,                             (2.10)
                                         2


                                                 7
where sµρν represents the spin density tensor of the fields which appears in the canonical angular
momentum tensor (2.7). For a detailed presentation of this approach we refer to the literature,
e.g. see reference [15]. Here we emphasize that this approach applies to any relativistically
invariant field theory, but that, for gauge theories, the gauge invariance of the “symmetry
improved” EMT of Belinfante is not a priori ensured. We will come back to this point in
footnotes 4 and 5.

Pure gauge fields: For the YM field, the described improvement procedure for the canonical
EMT (2.4) yields χµρν = Faµρ Aνa . Use of the equation of motion Dρ F µρ = 0 then leads to the
tensor

                                  µν          1                 1
                                Timp (F ) =      Tr (F µρ Fρ ν + η µν F ρσ Fρσ ) ,                            (2.11)
                                              c2                4

which is not only conserved and symmetric, but also gauge invariant4 . In n = 4 dimensions it
is traceless.
    Let us briefly consider the particular case of Maxwell’s U (1) theory in four space-time
                                                           µν
dimensions, for which the tensor (2.11) reduces to Timp       (F ) = F µρ Fρ ν + 41 η µν F ρσ Fρσ . This
tensor encodes the familiar expressions [49] for the energy and momentum densities of the
electromagnetic field (i.e. Timp      ~ 2+B
                              00 = 1 (E      ~ 2 ) and T 0i = (E ~ × B)
                                                                      ~ xi ) as well as for Maxwell’s
                                    2                   imp
                                                           ij                     µν
stress tensor density (given by the spatial components Timp ). The result for Timp    (F ) expresses in
a remarkable manner the union of space and time, energy and momentum as well as electricity
and magnetism as achieved by the masters of electrodynamics and special relativity (Maxwell,
                                                                                              µν
Einstein, Lorentz, Poincaré and Minkowski). For ν = 0, the local conservation law ∂µ Timp          = 0 is
                                                                                            00
simply Poynting’s theorem for the free electromagnetic field. Furthermore, we have Timp (F ) ≥ 0
        00 (F ) = 0 if and only if F = 0), as well as |E
(and Timp                                                   ~ ×B ~ | ≤ 1 (E ~2+B  ~ 2 ) = T 00 : from
                                                                        2R                    imp
                                 ~       0                          ν          3   0ν
these relations it follows that |P | ≤ P for the components P ≡ R3 d x Timp of the energy-
momentum four-vector, i.e. the latter vector is time-like and future directed [31].

Matter fields interacting with a gauge field: The improvement procedure of Belinfante
is somewhat different and more subtle when matter fields (scalars or fermions) are coupled to
a gauge field (e.g. see reference [15] for Abelian gauge theory). By way of illustration, let us
consider a multiplet ψ ≡ [ψ1 , . . . , ψN ]t of Dirac fields which is minimally coupled to the YM
                                                                           ↔
field, i.e. we have the Lagrangian density (A.11): LM (ψ, A) ≡ i ψ̄γ µ Dµ ψ − mψ̄ψ. Then, the
canonical EMT reads
                   µν          ih µ ν                       i
                 Tcan (ψ, A) =    ψ̄γ D ψ − (Dν ψ̄)γ µ ψ − η µν LM + Aνa jaµ [ψ, A] ,        (2.12)
                               2
where jaµ [ψ, A] ≡ q ψ̄γ µ Ta ψ. In this case, the standard (“naive”) improvement procedure is not
sufficient, rather an extra minimal coupling procedure has to be performed at the level of the
EMT’s so as to discard the last term (i.e. the potential-current term) in expression (2.12). We
will see in the next section that the improved EMT’s follow straightforwardly from the canonical
EMT’s if we improve these tensors by taking into account local gauge invariance.
   4
     As a matter of fact, the canonical expression (2.4) can be rendered gauge invariant in a very direct way by
guessing the superpotential term ∂ρ (Faµρ Aνa ) since this term reduces on-shell (i.e. by virtue of the equation of
motion Dρ F µρ = 0) to Faµρ (∂ρ Aν + ig [Aρ , Aν ])a and therefore allows to “gauge covariantize” the factor ∂ ν Aρ in
 µν
Tcan , thus ensuring gauge invariance of the EMT. This way of proceeding directly yields the result (2.11) without
determining the spin density sµρν .


                                                          8
2.2.2   Improvement procedure for constructing a gauge invariant EMT
For pure gauge theories (Abelian or non-Abelian) the standard derivation of the EMT (which
consists of determining the consequence of the invariance of the action functional under space-
time translations as outlined at the beginning of section 2.1) does not take into account the
gauge invariance of the Lagrangian. Thus, the lack of gauge invariance of the canonical EMT
does not come as a surprise. Gauge invariance of the EMT can either be achieved by exploiting
this invariance of the Lagrangian in the course of the derivation of the EMT or by exploiting it
upon improving the canonical EMT. The first approach is discussed in detail in reference [39]
(see also [37, 38, 40, 50]) and we will present here the second procedure which is inspired by the
first one, but which has not been considered in the literature to the best of our knowledge. As we
will see, the latter approach can also be used to determine in a neat and straightforward manner
the improved EMT for massive Abelian vector fields, i.e. Proca theory (this result being inspired
by the work [40, 50]) despite the fact that the complete Lagrangian is not gauge invariant in
this case. For all of these theories, the improved EMT obtained by exploiting gauge invariance
(considering either of the two methods that we just outlined) coincides with the one obtained
by Belinfante’s procedure whose goal is to construct a symmetric EMT out of the canonical one.
More generally, we will show that our method of exploiting gauge invariance also generalizes to
the case where matter fields (scalar or spinor fields) are coupled in a gauge invariant manner
to gauge fields: in this context the improvement follows readily and there is no need to add
by hand some extra term as it is the case for Belinfante’s procedure applied to this physical
system. We will consider a general gauge theory, the case of an Abelian theory corresponding
to the choice a = 1 for the internal symmetry indices and f abc = 0 for the structure constants.

Improvement for pure gauge theories: The assumptions concerning the Lagrangian L
are as follows. As before, we assume that L(x) ≡ L(Aν (x), ∂µ Aν (x)) is a scalar field depending
on Aν and its first-order derivatives, but not explicitly on x. Moreover, we suppose that L has
the form
                                       L ≡ Lg (F ) + Lm (A) ,                                 (2.13)
where Lm (A) only depends on Aν (and not on its derivatives) and where Lg is assumed to be
gauge invariant. The latter assumption implies that Lg only depends on Aν and its derivatives
by virtue of the components Fµν of the field strength tensor, this tensor being given by expres-
sion (A.7), i.e. Fµν = ∂µ Aν − ∂ν Aµ + iq [Aµ , Aν ]. (This result follows for instance explicitly by
exploiting the so-called Klein-Noether identities [6] which have first been discussed by F. Klein
for general relativity and which have been rediscovered by R. Utiyama [51] in the context of
YM theories.) Henceforth we have
                                           ∂Fρσb
                                ∂L                  ∂Lg     ∂Lg
                                    a
                                        =        a    b
                                                         =2   a
                                                                 .                            (2.14)
                              ∂(∂µ Aν )   ∂(∂µ Aν ) ∂Fρσ    ∂Fµν
   By definition the canonical EMT (2.1) presently reads
                                 µν      ∂L
                                Tcan =            ∂ ν Aaρ − η µν L ,
                                       ∂(∂µ Aaρ )
and obviously fails to be gauge invariant (even for Lm = 0) due to the factor ∂ ν Aaρ in its first
term. To obtain a gauge invariant expression, we use relations (2.14) and (A.7):
                        µν     ∂Lg  ν           ν         ν
                                                                     
                      Tcan ≡2     a
                                      Faρ + ∂ρ A a − iq [A   , Aρ ]a   − η µν L .          (2.15)
                              ∂Fµρ


                                                  9
For the second term we now apply the Leibniz rule:
       ∂Lg        ν          µρν
                                        ∂L 
                                           g                                     ∂Lg ν
   2     a
            ∂ ρ A a = −∂ ρ χ     − 2∂ρ     a
                                              Aνa ,             with χµρν ≡ −2     a
                                                                                      Aa = −χρµν .     (2.16)
       ∂Fµρ                             ∂Fµρ                                     ∂Fµρ

Here, the contribution ∂ρ χµρν is a superpotential term5 so that we have obtained an improved
       µν
EMT Timp   of the form (2.3). The second term on the right hand side of the previous equation can
be rewritten by using (2.14) and the equation of motion of the gauge field, ∂ρ ( ∂(∂∂L        ∂L
                                                                                       a ) = ∂Aa :
                                                                                    ρA )         µ         µ

                                   ∂L                     ∂L  ν      ∂L ν
                                      g
                           −2∂ρ            Aνa = ∂ρ                  A =     A .                       (2.17)
                                     a
                                   ∂Fµρ                    ∂(∂ρ Aaµ ) a  ∂Aaµ a

                                                     ∂Lg (F )
                                   ∂L
For the Lagrangian (2.13) we have ∂A a =              ∂Aa     + ∂L∂A
                                                                   m (A)
                                                                     a   with
                                              µ           µ          µ


                                         b
                                       ∂Fρσ
                                ∂Lg         ∂Lg                 ∂Lg
                                     =           = −2qf bca Acρ      ,                                 (2.18)
                                ∂Aaµ   ∂Aaµ ∂Fρσ
                                              b                   b
                                                                ∂Fρµ

and thereby (2.17) becomes
                                   ∂L                             ∂Lg   ∂Lm ν
                           −2∂ρ            Aνa = 2iq [Aν , Aρ ]a        +     A .                      (2.19)
                                     a
                                   ∂Fµρ                              a
                                                                    Fµρ   ∂Aaµ a

Since the first term in this expression compensates the third term in expression (2.15), we are
                          µν    µν + ∂ χµρν with
led to the final result Timp = Tcan    ρ


           µν     µν          µν
                                          h       ∂Lg ν        µν
                                                                     i h ∂L
                                                                           m ν      µν
                                                                                          i
         Timp = Timp (F ) + Timp (A) ≡ 2               Faρ − η    Lg  +      A  − η    Lm   .          (2.20)
                                                    a
                                                  ∂Fµρ                   ∂Aaµ a

For the Lagrangian L ≡ Lg (F ), this EMT only depends on the gauge potential by means of the
field strength, hence its gauge invariance is ensured by the invariance of Lg (F ).
    As a first application we consider pure YM theory, i.e. L = Lg (F ) ≡ − 4c12 Tr (F µν Fµν ),
thus we recover the result (2.11). By construction, this EMT is conserved and gauge invariant.
It is also symmetric and it is traceless for n = 4; the result coincides with the one obtained by
Belinfante’s procedure (see footnote 5) or from the Einstein-Hilbert EMT (section 3).
    If we include a mass term for the vector field Aµ into the four dimensional Abelian theory
by adding Lm (A) ≡ 12 m2 Aµ Aµ to Lg (F ), then (2.20) yields

                               µν     µν                             1 µν ρ
                             Timp = Timp (F ) + m2 (Aµ Aν −            η A Aρ ) .                      (2.21)
                                                                     2
This is the improved EMT for the Proca theory [50] where the mass term is also symmetric,
but neither gauge nor scale invariant.
   5
    We note that for Lg ≡ − 14 Faµν Fµν
                                     a
                                        , we have χµρν = Faµρ Aνa : This superpotential coincides with the one
resulting from Belinfante’s improvement procedure applied to pure gauge theories.




                                                           10
Improvement for matter fields interacting with gauge fields: Consider charged matter
fields ϕ (complex scalars φ or Dirac spinors ψ) which are minimally coupled to gauge fields. For
notational clarity, we first discuss the case of a multiplet of complex scalar fields, i.e. ϕ =
(φ, φ† ), for which we have specified the dynamics in equations (A.10)-(A.17). Quite generally,
suppose that we have a gauge invariant Lagrangian of the form

                        L ≡ Lg (F ) + LM ,         with LM ≡ L0 (Dµ ϕ) + L1 (ϕ) ,

where L1 (ϕ) only depends on the field ϕ and not on its derivatives. By virtue of gauge invariance,
the kinetic terms for gauge and matter fields, i.e. Lg (F ) and L0 (Dµ ϕ) can only depend on the
field strength and covariant derivatives, respectively:

   Fµν ≡ ∂µ Aν − ∂ν Aµ + iq [Aµ , Aν ] ,          Dµ φ ≡ ∂µ φ + iqAµ φ ,        Dµ φ† ≡ ∂µ φ† − iqφ† Aµ .
                                                                                                      (2.22)

Here, the generators Ta of the underlying Lie algebra are assumed to be in the adjoint repre-
sentation for Fµν and in an N -dimensional representation for the multiplet of matterRfields.
   As noted in equation (A.14), the variation of the matter field action SM [ϕ, A] ≡ dn x LM
with respect to the gauge field yields the matter current:
                               δSM [ϕ, A]     ∂LM       h
                                                           †      ∂L0       ∂L0        i
              jaµ [ϕ, A] ≡ −              = −      = iq  φ   Ta          −        Ta φ   .           (2.23)
                                 δAaµ         ∂Aaµ              ∂(Dµ φ† ) ∂(Dµ φ)

    By its very definition (2.1), the canonical EMT of the physical system under consideration
is given by
                             ∂L                  ∂L                        ∂L
                   µν
                  Tcan =             ∂ ν Aaρ +         ∂ ν φ + (∂ ν φ† )           − η µν L .        (2.24)
                                 a
                           ∂(∂µ Aρ )           ∂(∂µ φ)                   ∂(∂µ φ† )

Let us now substitute relation (2.14) and ∂(∂∂L µ ϕ)
                                                         ∂L
                                                     = ∂(Dµ ϕ)
                                                               , and let us use (2.22) to express
                           ν  a       ν
the ordinary derivatives ∂ Aρ and ∂ ϕ appearing in (2.24) in terms of the field strength and
the covariant derivatives, respectively. After grouping together the different contributions and
substituting relation (2.23), we get the result

         µν      µν          µν                               ∂Lg                           
        Tcan = Tint (F ) + Tint (ϕ, A) + Aνa jaµ [ϕ, A] + 2     a
                                                                    ∂ρ A ν
                                                                         a + iq [A ρ , Aν
                                                                                          ]a   ,     (2.25)
                                                              ∂Fµρ

with

                                  µν            ∂Lg ν                   µν
                                Tint (F ) ≡ 2     a
                                                     Fa ρ − η µν Lg = Timp (F )                      (2.26)
                                                ∂Fµρ

and

                        µν             ∂LM                     ∂LM
                      Tint (ϕ, A) ≡           Dν φ + (Dν φ† )           − η µν LM         .          (2.27)
                                      ∂(Dµ φ)                 ∂(Dµ φ† )

To conclude, we rewrite the last term in (2.25) following the line of arguments (2.16)-(2.19):
           ∂Lg                      ∂L ν                    ∂Lg
       2     a
                ∂ρ Aνa = −∂ρ χµρν +   a
                                        Aa = −∂ρ χµρν − 2iq   a
                                                                 [Aρ , Aν ]a − Aνa jaµ [ϕ, A] ,
           ∂Fµρ                     ∂Aµ                     ∂Fµρ

                                                       11
                                        ∂L      g    ∂L
                                                    ∂LM
where the last expression follows from ∂A a = ∂Aa + ∂Aa and the definition (2.23).
                                          µ     µ     µ
   In summary, with the definition
                           µν    µν                                          ∂Lg ν
                         Tint ≡ Tcan + ∂ρ χµρν ,     where χµρν ≡ −2           a
                                                                                  Aa ,
                                                                             ∂Fµρ
                       µν
we have a total EMT Tint  for the interacting system of fields which is a sum of the improved
EMT for the gauge field and the EMT of the matter fields interacting with the gauge field:
                                         µν     µν          µν
                                       Tint = Tint (F ) + Tint (ϕ, A) .                           (2.28)

                                                                 −1
Upon considering the Lagrangians (A.9), (A.10), i.e. Lg (F ) ≡ 4c  2
                                                                     Tr (F µν Fµν ) and LM (φ, A) ≡
(Dµ φ† )(Dµ φ) − m2 φ† φ, we obtain the explicit expression (2.11) and

                     µν
                   Tint (φ, A) = (Dµ φ† )(Dν φ) + (Dν φ† )(Dµ φ) − η µν LM (φ, A) .               (2.29)

Each of the tensors (2.11), (2.29) is gauge invariant (by construction) and symmetric in its
                          µν
indices. The total EMT Tint  is conserved (by construction), but the different contributions are
not: their divergence can easily be evaluated by using the field equations (A.12) and (A.13) as
well as the commutation relations [Dµ , Dν ]φ = iqFµν φ and [Dµ , Dν ]φ† = −iqφ† Fµν :

             µν          1                        µν                                  µν
        ∂µ Tint (F ) =      Tr (jµ F µν ) = −∂µ Tint (φ, A) ,        hence       ∂µ Tint =0 .     (2.30)
                         c2

Thus, we have the standard local conservation law for the total EMT tensor of the interacting
                                                                   µν
system. We note that the partial differential equation ∂µ Tint        (φ, A) = − c12 Tr (jµ F µν ) can be
viewed as a continuum version of the Lorentz-Yang-Mills force law, i.e. Wong’s equation [52].
                  µν
The relation ∂µ Tint (F ) = c12 Tr (jµ F µν ) may be regarded as the balance equation for the gauge
field energy. Indeed (considering Maxwell’s U (1) theory), from (j µ ) ≡ (ρ, ~j ) we have the Lorentz
                                 ~ ρE
force density (F µν jν ) = (~j · E, ~ +~j × B
                                            ~ ), hence we obtain, for ν = 0, the local balance equation

                                                       ~ + ~j · E
                                           −∂t w = div P        ~,

where w ≡ 12 (E ~2+B  ~ 2 ) represents the electromagnetic energy density and P     ~ ≡ E ~ ×B ~ is
the Poynting vector. The latter result is nothing else but Poynting’s theorem expressing that
the electromagnetic fields not only radiate, but also do work on the electric charges (currents),
thereby transforming electromagnetic energy into mechanical or thermal energy.
    The case of a Dirac field is tantamount to considering ϕ = (ψα , ψ̄α ) in the previous
                                 µν                             µν
derivation. The expression for Tint (F ) is unchanged and for Tint (ψ, A) one obtains the following
                                                          ↔
explicit result from the Lagrangian LM (ψ) ≡ i ψ̄γ µ Dµψ − mψ̄ψ:
                             µν            ih µ ν                  i
                           Tint (ψ, A) =     ψ̄γ D ψ − (Dν ψ̄)γ µ ψ − η µν LM .                   (2.31)
                                           2
By construction, this expression is gauge invariant, but it is not symmetric in its indices. The
                                         (µν)        µν      νµ
symmetry can be achieved by hand (Tint ≡ 21 [Tint       + Tint  ]) without destroying the other
characteristics of the tensor:

                    (µν)            ih µ ν                            i
                  Tint (ψ, A) =       ψ̄γ D ψ − (Dν ψ̄)γ µ ψ + (µ ↔ ν) − η µν LM          .       (2.32)
                                    4


                                                     12
Summary: We have recovered in a constructive manner the same results as for the modified
Belinfante procedure. The present approach does not require a determination of the spin densi-
ties and of the associated superpotential terms, nor does it require to perform specific minimal
couplings for each of the tensors under consideration. The only shortcoming is that the sym-
metry of the “gauge improved” EMT is not automatically realized. In fact, the symmetrization
of the gauge improved EMT for the Dirac field has to be achieved by hand, but this does not
raise any problem and this feature is actually also encountered for the Einstein-Hilbert EMT
of the Dirac field, see equation (3.23) below.

2.3    Assessment concerning the improvements
As we discussed in equations (2.5)-(2.7), the symmetry of the EMT in Minkowski space is
convenient, but by no means mandatory. Moreover it does not become mandatory when matter
or gauge fields are coupled to gravity if one takes into account the fact that the currently
available experimental data do not allow us to discriminate between general relativity and
alternative theories of Einstein-Cartan-type which allow for torsion and for a non symmetric
EMT of matter or gauge fields.
    If one considers gauge field theories in Minkowski space as we do in the present article,
then the EMT necessarily has to be gauge invariant due to its physical interpretation. However,
Belinfante’s improvement procedure does not yield a priori a gauge invariant EMT when applied
to gauge theories, and in addition it does not work in the straightforward manner for the
physically interesting case where matter fields are minimally coupled to a gauge field. The
improvement procedure that we presented here is devised to obtain an EMT which satisfies
the physically unavoidable condition of gauge invariance and it readily works for pure gauge
theories as well as for matter fields interacting with gauge fields (and even for massive Abelian
gauge fields). For pure gauge fields, the resulting expression for the “gauge-improved” EMT
coincides with the EMT obtained by Belinfante’s “symmetrization procedure” since the involved
superpotential terms coincide with each other.


3     Einstein-Hilbert EMT in Minkowski space
3.1    Motivation and procedure
The EMT (T µν ) in Minkowski space represents a collection of conserved current densities which
are associated to space-time translations, i.e. geometric transformations which act on both
space-time coordinates and on fields. These transformations being more complex than internal
symmetries which only act in the space of fields, it is useful to look at the conserved current
densities associated to internal symmetries so as to address the conceptual and technical issues
in a simpler setting.
    The Lagrangian LM (ϕ) ≡ LM (ϕ, A = 0) for free charged matter fields is invariant un-
der global (rigid) gauge transformations, i.e. at the infinitesimal level under transformations
parametrized by real constants ω a with a ∈ {1, . . . , nG }. (More generally, one can consider a
gauge invariant self-interaction of matter fields, e.g. include a self-interaction potential V (φ† φ)
for a multiplet of scalar fields (like the Higgs field) or an invariant Yukawa-type coupling between
scalar and spinor fields. Since these interaction terms do not involve derivatives of fields, they
lead to the same canonical currents (3.1).) According to Noether’s first theorem, the canonical
          µ
currents jcan,a [ϕ] associated to the global gauge invariance are given by ω a jcan,a
                                                                                µ     [ϕ] = ∂L M (ϕ)
                                                                                            ∂(∂µ ϕ) δϕ,



                                                  13
where δϕ denotes an infinitesimal global gauge transformation. For multiplets of free complex
scalars or Dirac spinors, one has the respective expressions
                               h                          i
                 µ
                jcan,a [φ] = iq φ† Ta ∂ µ φ − (∂ µ φ† )Ta φ ,    µ
                                                                jcan,a [ψ] = q ψ̄γ µ Ta ψ .      (3.1)

Here, the coupling constant q represents the “non-Abelian” charge of fields which we have
factored out from the parameters ω a so as to have the same overall numerical factor for the
canonical Noether currents as for the currents resulting from a coupling to a gauge field, see
next equation.
    Equivalently, the expressions (3.1) can be viewed as the response of the physical system to a
variation of the (external) gauge field, the latter field mediating the interaction between charge
carrying matter fields (see equations (A.14), (A.15)):

                    µ               δS[ϕ; A]
                   jcan,a [ϕ] = −                         (A = external gauge field) .           (3.2)
                                      δAaµ A=0

The equivalence follows from the fact that for an external gauge field, the action S[ϕ; A] is in
particular invariant under global gauge transformations and reduces to the free field action for
A = 0.
     In this section, we discuss the generalization of these ideas to geometric symmetries (the
global differential geometric aspects having been elaborated in detail in reference [17]). More
precisely, we apply the lines of reasoning described above for internal symmetries to the case of
the currents Tcanµν associated to the invariance of the relativistic field theory in Minkowski space

under space-time translations, i.e. under the rigid geometric transformations x          x0 (x) = x + a
        µ
with aR constant. In this respect we first note that the associated conserved Noether charges
P ν = dn−1 x Tcan 0ν represent the energy-momentum of the fields, these fields being matter fields

(describing for instance electrons) or gauge fields (gauge bosons mediating the interaction).
The exchange of energy and momentum is realized by gravity as described by a metric, i.e.
a symmetric non-degenerate tensor field g(x) ≡ (gµν (x)). Both matter and gauge fields (or
particles representing their field quanta) are subject to the gravitational interaction.
     In section 3.2, we first consider the case of a dynamical gravitational field, the gravita-
tional analogue of the YM equations Dµ F µν = j ν for the gauge field being given by Einstein’s
field equations Gµν = −κTµν for the gravitational field: instead of gauge transformations (i.e.
local internal transformations) we now consider diffeomorphisms xµ               x0µ (x) ≃ xµ + ξ µ (x)
(i.e. general coordinate transformations or x-dependent translations). By definition, the EMT
T µν [ϕ, g] in curved space then represents the response of the physical system to a variation of
the (external) gravitational field gµν , and its covariant conservation law in curved space holds
by virtue of the reparametrization invariance of the action. Finally, in section 3.3 we consider
the flat (Minkowski) space limit gµν = ηµν (representing the analogue of A = 0 for the in-
ternal symmetries) and we argue that the resulting EMT T µν [ϕ, g = η] (to which we refer to
                                                                          µν
as the Einstein-Hilbert EMT) coincides with the improved EMT Timp            [ϕ] associated to transla-
tional invariance in Minkowski space. For this identification an ambiguity appears since a given
Minkowski space Lagrangian may represent the flat space limit of different non-equivalent La-
grangians in curved space (involving for instance a minimal or a non-minimal coupling of matter
to gravity, both cases admitting different invariances): by considering both the diffeomorphism
invariance and the absence or presence of local Weyl invariance in curved space, one can recover,
in the flat space limit, the improved and the new improved EMT’s for a scalar field discussed

                                                     14
before. Moreover, one can relate the corresponding symmetries in curved space and in flat space
(local versus global scale invariance) [28, 53].
    Since the issues we just raised concern the relationship between results for field theories
in Minkowski space-time (like (3.2)) and results in general relativity (field theories in curved
space-time), we mention that general relativity may also be viewed as a solution to the problem
of constructing a field theory for a massless spin 2 field (symmetric tensor field) interacting with
matter in Minkowski space-time, i.e. a consistent special relativistic field theory for a massless
spin 2 particle. More precisely, starting from the free field theory for such a field in Minkowski
space-time as given by the Lagrangian of Pauli and Fierz (which amounts to a linearization
of the pure gravitational field equations), one has a local gauge invariance (corresponding to a
linearization of diffeomorphisms) and a consistent coupling to the EMT of matter then requires
a back-reaction of the gravitational field on matter: this process, referred to as Noether method,
has to be re-iterated in principle an infinite number of times. However, by the use of a classically
equivalent first-order action functional determined by J. Schwinger, S. Deser could promote the
free field theory to a consistent self-interacting theory in a few steps [54]. The initial flat space
metric does not appear in the final theory which rather involves a symmetric tensor field (gµν )
representing the dynamics of the gravitational field. This non-geometrical approach to general
relativity is described in detail in reference [55] (see also [56, 57]) and also played a role for
YM-theories since R. Feynman introduced the notion of ghost fields in this context before it
has been considered by B. DeWitt and by L.D. Faddeev and V.N. Popov for the quantization
of YM-theories [58].

3.2     Fields in curved space-time
3.2.1    General framework and dynamics
Curved space-time: Let M be a n-dimensional space-time manifold endowed with a metric
tensor field g ≡ (gµν ) of signature6 (+, −, . . . , −). We denote the covariant derivative of a tensor
field with respect to the Levi-Civita-connection by ∇µ (e.g. ∇µ V ρ = ∂µ V ρ + Γρµν V ν where the
coefficients Γρµν ≡ 21 g ρσ (∂µ gνσ + ∂ν gµσ − ∂σ gµν ) are the Christoffel symbols) and we write the
gauge covariant derivative as before by Dµ , e.g. for a complex scalar field Dµ φ ≡ ∇µ φ+iqAµ φ =
∂µ φ + iqAµ φ.
    The commutator of covariant derivatives defines the Riemann curvature tensor, i.e.

                                           [∇µ , ∇ν ]V ρ = Rρσµν V σ ,

and by a contraction of indices the latter gives rise to the Ricci tensor Rµν ≡ Rρµνρ , which yields
the curvature scalar R ≡ Rµµ . The equations of motion for the gravitational field involve the
Einstein tensor Gµν ≡ Rµν − 12 gµν R which is covariantly conserved ∇µ Gµν = 0 as a consequence
of its definition. (Here and in the following, we limit ourselves for simplicity to the case where
the cosmological constant Λ vanishes, otherwise an extra Λ-dependent term appears in Gµν and
in the action functional for the gravitational field.)
   6
    This signature is common in field theory and is often used in general relativity too (e.g. in references [19,
55, 59]), though a large part of the literature on general relativity uses the opposite signature (−, +, . . . , +).
Different conventions for the signature in combination with different sign conventions for the Riemann and
Einstein tensors imply differences of signs in various mathematical expressions. In particular, we choose here the
“(−, +, −)” convention for the curvature tensor according to the classification of Misner, Thorne and Wheeler [60].




                                                        15
Matter/gauge fields: The coupling of fermionic (spinorial) matter fields to gravity requires
the consideration of vielbein fields and will be addressed in section 3.4. In the sequel we only
consider bosonic (tensor) fields, and more precisely scalar matter fields φ and/or gauge vector
fields A ≡ (Aµ ). The YM field strength tensor in curved space is defined by

                   Fµν ≡ ∇µ Aν − ∇ν Aµ + iq [Aµ , Aν ] = ∂µ Aν − ∂ν Aµ + iq [Aµ , Aν ] ,

where the last expression follows from the symmetry of the Christoffel symbols (Γρµν = Γρνµ ).
   The scalar matter fields φ and/or the gauge field A will genericallyR be denoted by ϕ. Their
                                                                          n
                                                                             p
dynamics is assumed to be given by an action functional SM [ϕ, g] ≡ d x |g| LM (involving
g ≡ det g) which is invariant under diffeomorphisms, as well as under gauge transformations
Aµ     A0µ = Aµ + Dµ ω if a gauge field is present (see equation (A.6)). Thus, LM is a scalar
density with respect to diffeomorphisms.

Dynamics of fields: Following D. Hilbert, the dynamics and interaction of all fields is de-
scribed by the total action
                                                 Z          q                  Z          q
             S[ϕ, g] ≡ Sgrav [g] + SM [ϕ, g] ≡       dn x    |g| Lgrav (R) +       dn x   |g| LM (ϕ, g) .   (3.3)

                   1
Here, Lgrav (R) ≡ 2κ R (with κ ≡ 8πG, where G is Newton’s constant), and for the gauge field
A we have the Lagrangian density
                                            1                    1
                         LM (A, g) ≡ −         Tr (F µν Fµν ) = − g µρ g νσ Fρσ
                                                                             a   a
                                                                                Fµν .                       (3.4)
                                           4c2                   4
For a multiplet φ of complex scalar fields interacting with the gauge field, the minimal coupling
to gravity is described by the Lagrangian7

             LM (φ, A, g) ≡ g µν (Dµ φ† )(Dν φ) − m2 φ† φ ,           with Dµ φ ≡ ∂µ φ + iqAµ φ .           (3.5)

       Instead of the minimal coupling of the scalar matter field to gravity one may consider
                                                                  1
                                    L̃M (φ, g) ≡ LM (φ, g) −        ξRφ† φ ,                                (3.6)
                                                                  2
where ξ is a real parameter and where the second term represents a non-minimal coupling of
the matter field φ to gravity: in fact this is the only possible local scalar coupling with the
correct dimension [35, 59].
    The action (3.3), which defines the dynamics of fields in general relativity, is invariant under
general coordinate transformations. The equations of motion for the interacting matter and
gauge fields following from the functionals (3.3)-(3.5) read 0 = δS[ϕ, g]/δϕ = δSM [ϕ, g]/δϕ
which yields

         0 = Dµ F µν − j ν              (YM equation in curved space),
         0 = (Dµ Dµ + m2 )φ = 0         (Coupled Klein-Gordon equation in curved space).                    (3.7)
                                                                          p              
Here, Dµ F µν = ∇µ F µν + iq[Aµ , F µν ] where ∇µ F µν = √1 ∂µ                 |g| F µν denotes the covariant
                                                                    |g|
divergence of the antisymmetric tensor F µν . The derivative Dµ Dµ φ involves the contribution
   7
    More generally, we can include a gauge invariant self-interaction potential V (φ† φ): this will not change the
form (3.12) of the resulting EMT.


                                                        16
                              p             
φ ≡ g µν ∇µ ∇ν φ = √1 ∂µ          |g| g µν ∂ν φ , i.e. the Laplace-Beltrami operator acting on scalar
                        |g|
fields. The equations of motion of the metric field components represent Einstein’s field equa-
tions:
                                        p
            δS   δSgrav δSM     |g|
        0 = µν =        + µν =      (Gµν + κTµν ) ,                i.e.    Gµν = −κTµν           (3.8)
           δg     δg µν  δg    2κ
with

                                                  −2 δSM [ϕ, g]
                                    T µν [ϕ, g] ≡ p                    .                         (3.9)
                                                   |g| δgµν

For obvious reasons, we will refer to this tensor as the metric EMT (in curved space). By
reference to its originators [61, 62] it is also called the Einstein-Hilbert EMT in curved space.
Concerning the global sign in (3.9) we note that g µν gνλ = δλµ implies that Tµν = √+2 δSδg
                                                                                          M [ϕ,g]
                                                                                            µν    .
                                                                                         |g|


3.2.2    EMT for matter/gauge fields coupled to a dynamical gravitational field
On the metric EMT: From the equations of motion (3.8) one concludes that the local
field T µν [ϕ, g] plays a fundamental role if matter or gauge fields are coupled to gravity while
the
R n−1
     formulation of field theory in flat space essentially relies on the conserved charges P ν ≡
  d         0ν . Since the metric tensor is symmetric in its indices, the metric EMT is identically
       x Tcan
symmetric by construction, i.e. we have a symmetric expression without using the equations of
motion of ϕ. From ∇µ Gµν = 0 it follows that the EMT is covariantly conserved in curved space,
i.e.

                                             ∇µ T µν = 0 ,                                     (3.10)

if g satisfies Einstein’s field equations. Due to the presence of the covariant rather than the
ordinary derivative in equation (3.10), this relation does not represent a local conservation law.
This can be understood on physical grounds due to the fictitious forces which appear in arbitrary
(accelerated) frames [31, 62]. However, relation (3.10) can be related to a local conservation law
and, in certain instances, integral conservation laws for energy and momentum can be derived,
e.g. see references [19, 31, 55, 63–66].

Explicit expressions: From SM [ϕ, g] ≡ dn x |g| LM (ϕ, ∂µ ϕ; g) and the definition (3.9)
                                                 R        p

we can obtain an explicit expression of T µν in terms of the Lagrangian density LM (the latter
depending on the first order derivatives ∂µ ϕ):

                                                 ∂LM
                                     T µν = −2        − g µν LM    .                           (3.11)
                                                 ∂gµν

For our prototype Lagrangians (3.4) and (3.5) we get the results
                                  1                1
                   T µν [A, g] =    Tr F µρ Fρ ν + g µν F ρσ Fρσ ,
                                                                
                                                                                               (3.12)
                                 c2                4
                T µν [φ, A, g] = (Dµ φ† )(Dν φ) + (Dν φ† )(Dµ φ) − g µν LM (φ, A, g) .


                                                     17
For the Lagrangian (3.6) the tensor T µν [φ, g] involves additional contributions, see references [35,
59]. The conservation law ∇µ T µν = 0 can be explicitly checked for expressions (3.12) by using
the equations of motion of A and φ as well as the Bianchi identity 0 = Dρ Fµν + cyclic permu-
tations of the indices ρ, µ, ν. The metric EMT T µν [A, g] is gauge invariant as a consequence of
the gauge invariance of the Lagrangian density LM (A, g) and of definition (3.11). The results
concerning the tracelessness of the EMT’s (3.12) are the same as the ones obtained for the
improved EMT’s in Minkowski space.

Invariance under diffeomorphisms and the metric EMT: Let us verify that the co-
variant conservation law ∇µ T µν = 0 follows from the diffeomorphism invariance of the total
action (3.3). To do so, we note that a diffeomorphism xµ     x0µ (x) ≃ xµ − ξ µ (x) is generated by
                           µ
a smooth vector field ξ ≡ ξ ∂µ and acts on the metric tensor field as δξ gµν = ∇µ ξν +∇ν ξµ . From
the invariance of the action under infinitesimal diffeomorphisms and the use of the equations of
motion of matter and gauge fields it follows that
                                                                      !
                                              δS         δS                               δS
                                    Z                                         Z
                                        n
                 0 = δξ S =             d x      δξ ϕ +      δξ gµν       =       dn x        2∇µ ξν ,        (3.13)
                                              δϕ        δgµν                             δgµν

where we took into account the symmetry of gµν for passing to the last expression. By substitut-
ing the explicit form of the functional derivative δgδSµν as given in equation (3.8) and performing
an integration by parts, we obtain
                 1                                            1
                     Z          q                                 Z          q
  0 = δξ S = −           dn x   |g| (Gµν + κT µν )∇µ ξν =             dn x       |g| ξν (∇µ Gµν + κ∇µ T µν ) . (3.14)
                 κ                                            κ
    First, we consider the particular case where we have pure gravity, i.e. no matter fields, hence
T µν = 0. From the arbitrariness of ξ   ν one then concludes that ∇µ G
                                                                         µν = 0. In fact [57], this

line of arguments may be viewed as indirect proof of the relation ∇µ Gµν = 0 which holds
by virtue of the definition of Gµν in terms of the metric. The latter relation is referred to
as generalized Bianchi identity or as Noether identity since it follows from the invariance of
the action functional under a group of local symmetry transformations, i.e. an illustration of
Noether’s second theorem [3].
    Next we consider the total action: by using the identity ∇µ Gµν = 0 and the arbitrariness
of ξν , it then follows that the relation ∇µ T µν = 0 holds for the solutions of the matter field
equations.

3.2.3   EMT for matter/gauge fields coupled to an external gravitational field
Generalities: If we consider matter and gauge fields coupled to an external (background)
metric, then we do not have a dynamical term for gravity in the action, i.e. S = SM [ϕ; g]. The
EMT now represents the variation of the total action with respect to the external gravitational
field:

                               −2 δS[ϕ; g]
                 T µν [ϕ; g] ≡ p                          (g = external gravitational field) .                (3.15)
                                |g| δgµν

The covariant conservation law ∇µ T µν = 0 for the solutions of the matter field equations again
follows from the calculation (3.13), (3.14) in which we now drop the contribution Sgrav [g] to the
action, which implies that Gµν does not appear in the integral (3.14).

                                                         18
Case of an external gauge field: Let us also consider the case where both the metric field
g and the gauge potential (Aµ ) represent external fields. We suppose that the complex scalar
field φ is coupled toR the background   gauge field A, i.e. we have the gauge invariant total action
                        n
                           p
S ≡ SM [φ; A, g] ≡ d x |g| LM with LM given by expression (3.5). Then the gauge invariance
of the total action S and the use of the scalar matter field equations of motion δS/δφ = 0 imply
the covariant conservation law Dµ j µ = 0 for the current density vector (jaµ ) associated to the
scalar field; indeed, for an infinitesimal gauge variation (δg Aµ = Dµ ω) we have
                                                           !
                              δS         δS                                  δS
                   Z                                               Z                          Z          q
                        n                                                n
      0 = δg S =       d x       δg φ +     δ g Aµ             =        d x     Dµ ω =            dn x       |g| ω a (Dµ j µ )a ,
                              δφ        δAµ                                 δAµ

where
                                      −1 δS
                                jaµ ≡ p                        (A, g = external fields) .
                                        |g| δAaµ

For the matter field Lagrangian (3.5) we obtain the explicit expression
                                                       h                                  i
                                  jaµ [φ; A, g] = iq φ† Ta Dµ φ − (Dµ φ† )Ta φ .                                              (3.16)

    The invariance of the total action S under diffeomorphisms then leads to the continuum
version of the Lorentz-Yang-Mills force law in curved space-time [52],

                                                                       1
                                          ∇µ T µν [φ; A, g] =             Tr (F νµ jµ )                                       (3.17)
                                                                       c2

by virtue of                                                                                        !
                                                     δS         δS           δS
                                      Z
                                            n
                         0 = δξ S =        d x          δξ φ +     δ ξ Aµ +      δξ gµν                  ,
                                                     δφ        δAµ          δgµν
and δS/δφ = 0, δξ gµν = ∇µ ξν + ∇ν ξµ as well as

                             δξ Aµ = ξ ν ∂ν Aµ + (∂µ ξ ν )Aν = ξ ν Fνµ + Dµ (ξ ν Aν ) .

For instance, for the matter field Lagrangian (3.5), we obtain the explicit expression (3.12) for
T µν [φ; A, g] and (3.16) for j µ [φ; A, g]. Once the external gauge field is promoted to a dynamical
gauge field by adding the gauge field Lagrangian LM (A; g) of equation (3.4) to the interacting
matter field Lagrangian (3.5), the total EMT of both matter and gauge fields is covariantly
conserved as we noted already after equation (3.15). In the flat space limit, expression (3.12)
                                                                 µν
for T µν [φ; A, g] reduces to expression (2.29) for the EMT Tint    [φ, A] and equation (3.17) reduces
to the balance equation (2.30) for the latter EMT.

3.3     Einstein-Hilbert’s EMT for matter/gauge fields in Minkowski space
Definition: The result (3.15) serves as a motivation for defining the Einstein-Hilbert or metric
EMT for bosonic matter fields ϕ in flat space by the relation
                                                                   (
                       −2 δS[ϕ; g]
                                     
       µν                                                               g = external gravitational field
      TEH [ϕ] ≡                                  ,    where                                                                   (3.18)
                                                                        η ≡ (ηµν ) ≡ diag (1, −1, . . . , −1) .
                       p
                         |g| δgµν         g=η



                                                               19
By construction, the so-defined EMT is identically symmetric and it admits a natural general-
                                                                                        µν
ization to curved space by its very definition. The flat space conservation law ∂µ TEH     = 0 for
  µν
TEH   follows directly from the covariant conservation law ∇µ T µν = 0 in curved space.
    The definition (3.18) for the EMT of a physical system in Minkowski space amounts to
                                                      µν
coupling this system to a gravitational field: then TEH  [ϕ] represents the response of the system
to a variation of the (external) metric to which all (energy and momentum carrying) fields
couple and which mediates the gravitational interaction of these fields. This definition of the
EMT in Minkowski space is conceptually and mathematically quite different from the one of
  µν
Timp [ϕ] which we presented in section 2 and which follows from Noether’s theorem (eventually
supplemented by an improvement procedure to render the canonical expression of the EMT
symmetric in its indices or gauge invariant, or both symmetric and traceless). Before trying to
relate the different expressions for the EMT’s, we have a look at the explicit expressions for the
Einstein-Hilbert EMT.

Explicit expressions: The YM Lagrangian LM (A, g) in curved space, as given by (3.4),
reduces in the flat space limit to the YM Lagrangian (A.9) in Minkowski space; similarly both
of the scalar field Lagrangians LM (φ, g) and L̃M (φ, g) given in equations (3.5) and (3.6) reduce
in the flat space limit to one and the same Minkowski space Lagrangian L(φ). Furthermore, the
metric EMT’s (3.12) for the YM field and for the scalar field coupled to the former field reduce in
the flat space limit to the improved EMT’s (2.11) and (2.29). We also mention that for the non-
minimal coupling of a free massless scalar field to gravity as described by the Lagrangian (3.6),
the corresponding metric EMT reduces in the flat space limit to the new improved EMT (2.9).

Relating the different expressions: In the following, we will show that the two definitions
for the EMT’s of YM-theories in Minkowski space, i.e. (3.18) which results from the coupling
to gravity, and the improved EMT (2.28) (with the definitions (2.26) and (2.27)) which follows
from Noether’s first theorem supplemented by the “gauge improvement” procedure, coincide
with each other. (We refer to the work [17] for general mathematical arguments and results
relying on differential geometric tools.) The coincidence of results for the EMT’s can readily
be explained on general grounds by comparing the expression (3.11) for the metric EMT, i.e.
T µν = −2 ∂L        µν
            ∂gµν − g LM , with the general expressions (2.26), (2.27) for the improved EMT’s of
              M

the YM field A and of a scalar field multiplet φ coupled to the YM field.
                                                                                         µν
    First, we note that the second term in T µν reduces directly to the second term in Tint as g µν
              µν                                 µν         ∂LM
reduces to η . Concerning the first term in T , i.e. −2 ∂gµν , we note that the curved space
Lagrangians LM (A, g) and LM (φ, A, g) (as given by expressions (3.4), (3.5)) are quadratic in
the field strengths (Fµν and Dµ φ, respectively) with coefficients depending on g ρσ . Thus the
relation
                         ∂g ρσ               (µν)            (µν)     ∂gρσ
                               = −g ρα g σβ δ(αβ) ,    with δ(αβ) =        ,                (3.19)
                         ∂gµν                                         ∂gµν

implies that −2 ∂L
                 ∂gµν reduces in the flat space limit to an expression which is again quadratic
                   M

in the field strengths and which is, by construction, Lorentz covariant, gauge invariant and




                                                  20
symmetric in the indices. By virtue of Euler’s homogeneous function theorem we have
                             ∂LM          g→η   ∂Lg ν
                          −2      (A, g) −→ 2     a
                                                    Fa ρ ,                                                         (3.20)
                             ∂gµν              ∂Fµρ
                           ∂LM            g→η  ∂LM                     ∂LM
                        −2      (φ, A, g) −→          Dν φ + (Dν φ† )           ,
                           ∂gµν               ∂(Dµ φ)                 ∂(Dµ φ† )

i.e. the results (2.26) and (2.27).

3.4    Case of spinor fields
The coupling of spinor fields to gravity (put forward in Weyl’s seminal paper [67] of 1929)
requires the consideration of orthonormal vielbein fields ea µ (x) related to the metric by gµν =
ηab ea µ eb ν . The components E µ a of thepinverse of the matrix (ea µ ) define the frame vector field
Ea ≡ E µ a ∂µ : E µ a ea ν = δµν . We have |g| = e with e ≡ | det (ea µ )|. The vielbein EMT [55] is
then defined by varying the action for the spinor fields (coupled to an external gravitational
field) with respect to the vielbein or frame fields:

                                         1 δS                             −1 δS
                                T aµ =              ,        or T µ a =            .                               (3.21)
                                         e δE µ a                          e δea µ

The invariance of the action S[ϕ, ea µ ] under local Lorentz transformations (parametrized at the
infinitesimal level by δε ea µ = εa b eb µ with εab = −εba ) and the application of the matter field
equations of motion δS/δϕ = 0 imply that the tensor T ab is symmetric on-shell: from
                                                !
                          δS        δS                                                   1
              Z                                          Z                                   Z
                  n
 0 = δε S =       d x        δε ϕ + a δε ea µ       =−        dn x e T µ a εa b eb µ =           dn x e T [ab] εab , (3.22)
                          δϕ       δe µ                                                  2

and from the arbitrariness of εab we conclude that T [ab] = 0, or equivalently T ab = T ba . Then,
the spinor field EMT T µν ≡ E µ a E ν b T ab is also symmetric in the curved space indices for the
solutions of the matter field equations. Furthermore [68], the matter field equations ensure the
covariant conservation law ∇µ T µν = 0 by virtue of the line of arguments (3.13), (3.14) with
S ≡ SM .
    In summary, the matter field equations for the spinor fields ensure the consistency of Ein-
stein’s field equations Gµν = −κT µν involving the Einstein tensor Gµν which is both symmetric
and covariantly conserved in the absence of torsion [55]. (The latter assumption is generally
made in Einstein gravity, but we note that a generalization of the theory including torsion is
given by the so-called Cartan-Sciama-Kibble approach to gravity, see [44, 55] and references
therein.) Accordingly, the EMT with lower indices (which also has to be on-shell symmetric in
the absence of torsion) is generally written as

                                             1 a
                                    Tµν =      (e µ ηab T b ν + (µ ↔ ν)) .                                         (3.23)
                                             2

   By way of illustration, we consider the Dirac field coupled to a gauge field (Aµ ) and to
gravity. Then we have covariant derivatives involving the spin connection ωµ ,

  Da ψ ≡ E µ a Dµ ψ = E µ a [∂µ ψ + ωµ ψ + iqAµ ψ] ,             Da ψ̄ = E µ a [∂µ ψ̄ − ψ̄ ωµ − iq ψ̄Aµ ] , (3.24)


                                                        21
and the action functional reads8
                                                             ↔
                                        Z                               
                                a
                     S[ψ, A; e µ ] ≡        dn x e ψ̄ iγ a Da ψ − mψ ,
                                        Z            hi                                      i
                                            dn x e        ψ̄γ a Da ψ − (Da ψ̄)γ a ψ − mψ̄ψ
                                                                                
                                    =                                                                     (3.25)
                                        Z             2
                                    ≡       dn x e LM (ψ, A, E µ a ) .

Variation of this action with respect to the frame fields E µ a and use of the matter field equations
of motion (which imply that the term in δS which is proportional to δe, i.e. the function LM ,
vanishes) yields

                                                            ∂LM
                                                  T aµ =             ,                                    (3.26)
                                                            ∂E µ a

                      ↔
hence T a µ = iψ̄γ a Dµ ψ. The associated symmetric tensor (3.23) now has the form

                                              i       ↔             ↔
                                    T µν =      ψ̄γ µ D ν ψ + ψ̄γ ν D µ ψ .
                                                                         
                                                                                                          (3.27)
                                              2

By virtue of the matter field equations, it is covariantly conserved and coincides in the flat
space limit with the improved EMT (2.32) for the Dirac field coupled to the YM field (the
latter being conserved, symmetric and gauge invariant).

3.5    Summary
In this section we recalled the definition of the metric EMT in curved space and, for gauge
field theories, we showed that the resulting expressions reduce in the flat space limit to gauge
invariant, symmetric EMT’s which coincide with the improved EMT’s determined in section 2.
(For the case of a non minimal coupling of scalar fields to gravity, one recovers the new improved
EMT in Minkowski space, the local scale invariance reducing to global scale invariance.)


4     On the quantum theory: Noether’s theorem and Ward iden-
      tities
In the perturbative approach to Lagrangian models in quantum field theory, the first Noether
theorem, as applied to geometric symmetries (e.g. translational invariance) or to internal sym-
metries (e.g. global U (1) transformations), finds its expression in the so-called Ward (or Ward-
Takahashi) identities. A general formulation and simple derivation of the latter has been put
forward by R. Stora [69–71] towards 1971. Here, we outline the general ideas which are nicely
summarized in [7] and refer to the monographs [25, 30, 72] for the technical details and physical
applications.
    We consider the case of a global internal symmetry transformation of a matter multiplet
ϕ ≡ [ϕ1 , . . . , ϕN ]t , e.g. relations (A.3) with constant infinitesimal symmetry parameters ω a
    8
      We note that the inclusion of an invariant Yukawa-like coupling with scalar fields does not modify the form
of the resulting EMT.



                                                           22
(with a = 1, . . . , nG ); thus, we have δϕr (x) = ω a Φra (ϕ(x)) and Noether’s first theorem then
reads
                              δS                                   ∂L
                           Φra r + ∂µ jaµ = 0 ,   with jaµ ≡             Φr .
                              δϕ                                ∂(∂µ ϕr ) a
In quantum theory one is interested in the vacuum expectation values hT ϕs1 (y1 ) . . . ϕsn (yn )i of
time-ordered field operators ϕs1 (y1 ), . . . , ϕsn (yn ) with n = 1, 2, . . . . Use of the conservation law
∂µ jaµ = 0 (associated to Noether’s theorem in the classical theory) and of the definition of the
T -product in terms of Heaviside’s function lead to
                                                   n
     ∂       µ
                                                  X
        hT ja  (x)ϕs 1 (y1 ) . . . ϕs n (y n )i =     δ(x0 − yj0 ) hT ϕs1 (y1 ) . . . [ja0 (x), ϕsj (yj )] . . . ϕsn (yn )i .
    ∂xµ                                           j=1

By virtue of the canonical commutation relations for the field operators, one can evaluate the
                                                                            s
equal-time commutator on the right-hand side: [ja0 (x), ϕsj (yj )] 0 0 = −iΦaj (x) δ(~x − ~yj ). This
                                                                                     x =yj
yields the Ward identities (in configuration space):

                                                        n
      ∂        µ
                                                       X                                  s
        µ
          hT ja  (x)ϕs 1 (y1 ) . . . ϕs n (y n )i = −i     δ(x − yj ) hT ϕs1 (y1 ) . . . Φaj (x) . . . ϕsn (yn )i . (4.1)
     ∂x                                                j=1


By Fourier transformation, these identities can be rewritten in momentum space and in fact it
is in the latter space that they were originally discovered for a special case in electrodynamics,
and that they are often encountered in the literature. Their general form (4.1) shows that
the Ward identities are the reflection of Noether’s first theorem: they represent a collection of
important relations between the correlation functions in quantum field theory which result from
the underlying classical symmetry group.
    One may wonder about the impact of an improvement jaµ           jaµ + ∂ρ Baρµ for a given locally
                                       µ
conserved classical current density (ja ) on the explicit expression of Ward identities. General
statements require a specification of the class of superpotentials which is considered. If the
latter depend on the canonical momenta, derivatives of the delta function potentially appear
in the Ward identities. Here, we only refer to some general recent works devoted to Ward
identities [73, 74]. Furthermore, for completeness, we mention some works which deal more
specifically with the quantum theory related to the EMT (some others being discussed in the
next section): [30, 75–80].


5     Ward identities, their “cousins and descendants”: on (the
      work of) Raymond Stora
The so-called Slavnov (or Slavnov-Taylor) identities can be viewed as a generalization of the
Ward identities and can be formulated and derived in simple terms using the so-called BRST
symmetry. This symmetry has been discovered by Becchi, Rouet and Stora (BRS) [81, 82] (and
shortly thereafter in an unpublished work by Tyutin [83]) and it was shown by BRS [81, 82]
that this symmetry allows to prove the renormalizability of non-Abelian gauge theories and
to characterize the observables as well as the anomalous breakings of classical symmetries in
quantum theory (see references [84–88] for some early elaborations and the monograph [89]
for an introductory account). The BRST symmetry transformations were originally expressed
in terms of an anti-commuting (Grassmann) parameter, but BRS could quickly dispense with

                                                              23
this parameter [82], thus regarding the symmetry operator as an anti-derivation acting on
the BRS differential algebra. R. Stora always denoted the BRST-transformation of a field ϕ
by sϕ while referring to it as the “Slavnov operation” [85, 90]. Due to its nilpotency, this
operation allows for a cohomological interpretation [82, 85] and thereby allows to reformulate
the problem of perturbative renormalization of Lagrangian field theories with rigid or local
symmetries as an algebraic problem: this approach is referred to as algebraic renormalization,
see [91] for a nice summary and references [89, 92] for a detailed presentation and various
applications. In particular, the realization of Wess and Zumino [93] that anomalies (which
describe an anomalous breaking of classical symmetries in quantum theory) are described by
a consistency condition could be neatly reformulated as a cohomological problem [85] (and
treated by BRS for YM theories [82]). In fact, the issue of determining the anomalous terms
can be dealt with by using a simple algebraic method (referred to as the descent equation
method) put forward by R. Stora [85] with the help of some mathematical lemmas due to
J.A. Dixon (see also [94–96] as well as the general introduction presented in the monograph [68]).
This approach has been applied by R. Stora and his collaborators to a wealth of theories
like gravity [97], supersymmetry [98], string theory [99], conformal models [100] or topological
theories [101], and has been investigated by numerous authors. Quite generally, the method of
BRST quantization within the Lagrangian or the Hamiltonian [102] framework, and its variants
developed by the Russian School (Batalin, Fradkin, Tyutin, Vilkovisky), represents a general
and powerful approach to the quantization of constrained dynamical systems with a finite or
infinite number of degrees of freedom [102–104].
      The life-long interest of R. Stora in the quantization of field theories based on the fun-
damental principle of causality made him also contribute to general approaches as the one of
Epstein and Glaser (elaborating recently on the problem of the extension of distribution-valued
field operators [105]), and work out what he considered to be the “missing chapters” of the
subject [106], an endeavor that he could unfortunately not complete despite relentless efforts
and various successes.
      While interested and knowledgeable in a vast spectrum of topics in physics, Raymond was
always particularly concerned with unveiling the underlying mathematical structures or find-
ing the appropriate mathematical framework for the formulation of theories or for the solu-
tion of problems, e.g. anomalies, differential algebras, gauge fixing, cohomological field theories,
. . . [107]. In all instances he was extremely attached to correct and precise statements which gen-
erally contributed to clarify the issues, but also retained him from publishing a certain number
of his results (leaving nicely hand-written manuscripts communicated to friends and colleagues).
He shared his passion with various long term friends from the international “Feldverein” like
C. Itzykson, B. Zumino, D. Kastler, A.S. Wightman, J. Wess, H.-J. Borchers, R. Haag, . . . ,
and it is very sad to note that all of these masters left us fairly recently, their deep insights
and precious advice being greatly missed. As for Raymond, all of those who had the chance to
meet him will always remember his culture, curiosity, enthusiasm, his brilliant and penetrating
insights, as well as his great modesty, generosity and humanity.



Acknowledgments
F.G. acknowledges stimulating discussions with F. Delduc and H. Samtleben and wishes to
thank M. Dubois-Violette and E. Pilon for helpful comments. We are grateful to J.-B. Zuber for
a careful reading of the text and for his pertinent remarks. We also acknowledge the constructive


                                                24
feedback of S. Deser and F. Hehl concerning different points in the text. Finally, we are indebted
to the anonymous referee for his constructive and clarifying comments which contributed to an
improvement of the presentation.



A      Gauge field theories in a nutshell
To set the stage and fix the notation, we briefly recall the basics of non-Abelian gauge theories9 .
in this appendix (e.g. see references [15, 71, 85, 108]).

General set-up: Let G be a compact matrix Lie group (e.g. G = SU (N )) and g its Lie
algebra with basis elements {T a }a=1,...,nG (with nG ≡ dim G) satisfying

                                             [T a , T b ] = if abc T c .                                   (A.1)

Here, the real structure constants f abc are totally antisymmetric in the indices10 . Furthermore,
we assume that the matrices T a are Hermitian, i.e. (T a )† = T a . By virtue of relation (A.1), they
are also traceless. For instance, for G = SU (2) we can choose T a = 12 σ a where σ 1 , σ 2 , σ 3 are
the Pauli matrices and the structure constants are then given by εabc . Since the indices a, b, c
are internal indices, they can indifferently be written as upper or lower indices, and Einstein’s
convention of summing over identical indices is also applied to them.
    The element U of the nG -dimensional Lie group G depends smoothly on nG real parameters
ω a and it can be written (at least in the vicinity of the identity of G) as

                               U = e−iqω ≃ 1 − iqω ,             with ω ≡ ω a Ta .                         (A.2)

Here, the real constant q represents the “non-Abelian” or “YM charge” (which could as well be
absorbed in the parameters ω a in this context) and we have U † = U −1 . The finite-dimensional
structure group G gives rise to the infinite-dimensional gauge group G ≡ {U : Rn → G} whose
elements describe the gauge transformations of matter and gauge fields which we will outline
next.

Fields and transformation laws: We suppose that the matter content is given by a multi-
plet ϕ ≡ [ϕ1 , . . . , ϕN ]t , i.e. a column vector with N components ϕA each of which is a classical
relativistic field, e.g. we have a collection of complex scalar fields φA or of Dirac fields ψA . For
global gauge transformations, the multiplet ϕ is assumed to transform with a N -dimensional
unitary representation Û of the group G: this means that the group element U ∈ G acts on ϕ
by a unitary N × N matrix Û satisfying U        [1 U2 = Û1 Û2 . This representation of G is related to a
N -dimensional representation T̂a of the Lie algebra g (see equation (A.2)):

                   Û = e−iqω̂ ≃ 1N − iq ω̂ ,         with ω̂ ≡ ω a T̂a     and T̂a† = T̂a .
   9
     Non-Abelian gauge theories have been discovered at about the same time and independently by W. Pauli, by
R. Shaw, by C. N. Yang and R. Mills and by R. Utiyama who considered right away the case of general Lie groups.
However, the priority goes to Yang and Mills who were the first to publish their results — see reference [67] for
the fascinating history of the subject.
  10
     For semi-simple Lie algebras like SU (N ), the structure constants can be chosen to be totally antisymmetric.
Here, we recall [109] that a real or complex Lie algebra is called semi-simple if it does not contain any Abelian
ideal (i.e. invariant Lie subalgebra) except {0}; the Lie algebra g is called simple if it is not Abelian and does
not contain any ideals other than g and {0}.


                                                        25
For (local) gauge transformations, the symmetry parameters ω a and the matrices Û depend
smoothly on x ∈ Rn .
   The transformation law of the matter multiplet ϕ and of its Hermitian conjugate ϕ† read
                       U
                       ϕ = Û ϕ ,            i.e. δϕ = −iq ω̂ϕ or δϕA = −iq ω̂AB ϕB ,
                 U †
                  ϕ = ϕ Û †    −1
                                     ,       i.e. δϕ† = iq ϕ† ω̂     or δϕ†A = iq ϕ†B ω̂BA .      (A.3)

Here, we use the notation ϕ†A ≡ (ϕ† )A and we note that the transformations only act on the
internal symmetry indices A of the matter fields.
    The covariant derivative of the matter multiplet ϕ is defined by

              Dµ ϕ ≡ ∂µ ϕ + iq Âµ ϕ ,                    Dµ ϕ† ≡ (Dµ ϕ)† = ∂µ ϕ† − iqϕ† Âµ .    (A.4)

Here, Âµ (x) ≡ Aaµ (x)T̂ a is the N -dimensional representation of the gauge potential: the latter
is a g-valued vector field Aµ (x) ≡ Aaµ (x)T a where (Aaµ )µ∈{0,1,...,n−1} is a real-valued vector field
for each value of a ∈ {1, . . . , nG }. Under a finite gauge transformation x 7→ U (x), the gauge
potential transforms inhomogeneously with the adjoint representation of the gauge group:
                                                              i
                                         U
                                          Aµ = U Aµ U −1 −      U ∂µ U −1 .                       (A.5)
                                                              q
For infinitesimal gauge variations UAµ ≃ Aµ + δAµ it follows from (A.5) and (A.2) that Aµ
transforms with the covariant derivative of the g-valued functions x 7→ ω(x) ≡ ω a (x)Ta :

                                         δAµ = Dµ ω ≡ ∂µ ω + iq [Aµ , ω] .                        (A.6)

This transformation law involves the non-Abelian charge q (self-coupling constant) which also
appears in the matter transformation law (A.3). For the Lie group generators Ta appearing in
ω ≡ ω a Ta and Aµ ≡ Aaµ Ta , we can consider any representation Ta 7→ r(Ta ) of the Lie algebra,
e.g. r(Ta ) = T̂a as we did for the discussion of the matter multiplet ϕ.
    The commutator of two covariant derivatives determines the YM field strength tensor Fµν ≡
  a
Fµν Ta :
               [Dµ , Dν ] ω = iq [Fµν , ω] , with Fµν ≡ ∂µ Aν − ∂ν Aµ + iq [Aµ , Aν ] .    (A.7)
Hence we have the gauge transformation law
                           U
                               Fµν = U Fµν U −1          or        δFµν = iq [Fµν , ω] ,          (A.8)

i.e. Fµν transforms with the adjoint representation. The Jacobi identity for the covariant deriva-
tives implies the Bianchi identity for the field strength: 0 = Dλ Fµν + cyclic permutations of the
indices. In contrast to the Abelian theory, the field strength presently involves terms which are
non-linear in the gauge field Aµ and it is not invariant under gauge transformations. Its com-
ponents F0i a ≡ E a , F a = ε B a (for n = 4) may be viewed as the non-Abelian generalization
                  xi   ij    ijk xk
of the electric and magnetic fields of Maxwell’s theory.
     The theory can be generalized from Minkowski space to an n-dimensional smooth manifold
M and a global (coordinate free) formulation can be given, e.g. see reference [110]. The latter
relies on the introduction of a principal fiber bundle P (with compact Lie group G) over M ,
i.e. a manifold P which has locally the structure U × G where U is an open subset of M . The
YM potential is then introduced as a g-valued 1-form on P with appropriate transformation
properties and it is referred to as a connection. The expressions given above for Rn then represent
local expressions on U ≃ Rn .

                                                         26
Dynamics: In the following, we generally drop the hat denoting the representation (of the
Lie algebra or Lie group) which is considered for the matter multiplets. Concerning the nor-
malization of the trace, we note that for a simple Lie algebra one may choose a basis (Ta ) such
that Tr (r(T a ) r(T b )) = c2 (r) δ ab for any representation Ta 7→ r(Ta ), where the constant c2 (r)
is known as the index of the representation r. For instance, for the adjoint representation, Ta
is represented by (r(Ta ))bc = −ifabc and c2 (r) = 2.
    The dynamics of pure YM-theory is described by the classical action
                                  1                                      1
                                          Z                                   Z
                                                n         µν
                      Sg [A] ≡ −              d x Tr (F        Fµν ) = −           dn x F aµν Fµν
                                                                                               a
                                                                                                  ,         (A.9)
                                 4c2                                     4
which is invariant under gauge transformations. Free Maxwell theory represents a particular case
of pure YM theory for which the gauge group G = U (1) is Abelian: the internal index takes
a single value a = 1 and the totally antisymmetric structure constants f abc in (A.1) vanish,
as does the commutator term in the field strength (A.7) and in the covariant derivative (A.6).
Thus, in this particular case there is no self-interaction of gauge potentials in the action (A.9).
    The dynamics of a matter multiplet φ ≡ [φ1 , . . . , φN ]t , of N scalar fields or of a multiplet
ψ ≡ [ψ1 , . . . , ψN ]t of N Dirac fields of mass m which are coupled to the gauge field Aµ are
respectively described by the gauge invariant Lagrangian densities

                                  LM (φ, A) ≡ (Dµ φ† )(Dµ φ) − m2 φ† φ ,                                   (A.10)

and
                                      ↔                       ih µ                     i
               LM (ψ, A) ≡ i ψ̄γ µ Dµψ − mψ̄ψ ≡                 ψ̄γ Dµ ψ − (Dµ ψ̄)γ µ ψ − mψ̄ψ ,           (A.11)
                                                              2
where ψ̄ ≡ [ψ̄1 , . . . , ψ̄N ] and ψ̄γ µ ≡ [ψ̄1 γ µ , . . . , ψ̄N γ µ ]. The equations of motion for interacting
matter and gauge fields follow from the gauge invariant action functional S[ϕ, A] ≡ Sg [A] +
SM [ϕ, A]: we have

           δS    δSM                                                  δS     δSM
      0=     †
               =      = −(Dµ Dµ + m2 )φ ,                 or 0 =           =       = (iγ µ Dµ − m)ψ ,      (A.12)
           δφ     δφ†                                                 δ ψ̄    δ ψ̄

as well as the Hermitian conjugate expressions, and (for a ∈ {1, . . . , nG })

                       δS    δSg   δSM
                0=       a
                           =   a
                                 +      = Dν Faνµ − jaµ ,                     i.e.     Dν F νµ = j µ ,     (A.13)
                      δAµ    δAµ   δAaµ

with

                                                               δSM [ϕ, A]
                                              jaµ [ϕ, A] ≡ −                   .                           (A.14)
                                                                 δAaµ

From (A.14), (A.10) and (A.11), we get the g-valued currents
                          h                               i
           jaµ [φ, A] = iq φ† T̂a Dµ φ − (Dµ φ† )T̂a φ ,                    jaµ [ψ, A] = q ψ̄γ µ T̂a ψ ,   (A.15)

which transform with the adjoint representation under gauge transformations:

                     j = U j µ U −1
                   U µ
                                              or      δj µ = iq [j µ , ω]          with ω ≡ ω a Ta .       (A.16)


                                                          27
The equation of motion (A.13) for the non-Abelian gauge field is referred to as the Yang-Mills
equation. In contrast to the Maxwell equation appearing in U (1) gauge theory, the YM equation
involves the covariant derivative. Hence the matter current j µ [ϕ, A], which appears as a source
in this equation, is only covariantly conserved:
                          1                   1
  Dµ j µ = Dµ Dν F νµ =     [Dµ , Dν ]F νµ = − iq [Fµν , F µν ] = 0 ,     i.e.   Dµ j µ = 0 .      (A.17)
                          2                   2

References
  [1] H. Weyl, Symmetry, (Princeton Univ. Press, 1952).
  [2] F. Gieres, “About symmetries in physics”, in Symmetries in Physics, F. Gieres, M. Kibler,
      C. Lucchesi, and O. Piguet, eds., (Editions Frontières, 1998). arXiv:hep-th/9712154.
      Proceedings of the fifth Séminaire Rhodanien de Physique, Dolomieu 1997.
  [3] E. Noether, “Invariante Variationsprobleme”, Nachr. Ges. Wiss. Gött. 1918 (1918) 235–257,
      arXiv:physics/0503066 [physics].
  [4] P. J. Olver, Applications of Lie Groups to Differential Equations, second ed., vol. 107 of
      Graduate Texts in Mathematics, (Springer Verlag, 1993).
  [5] Y. Kosmann-Schwarzbach, The Noether Theorems: Invariance and Conservation Laws in the
      Twentieth Century, Sources and Studies in the History of Mathematics and Physical Sciences,
      (Springer Verlag, 2011).
  [6] K. Sundermeyer, Symmetries in Fundamental Physics, vol. 176 of Fundam. Theor. Phys.,
      (Springer Verlag, 2014).
  [7] J. B. Zuber, “Invariances in physics and group theory”, Talk given at the Conference Lie and
      Klein: the Erlangen program and its impact on mathematics and physics, Strasbourg, Sept. 2012,
      arXiv:1307.3970 [hep-th].
  [8] M. Bañados and I. A. Reyes, “A short review on Noether’s theorems, gauge symmetries and
      boundary terms, for students”, arXiv:1601.03616 [hep-th].
  [9] V. Ogievetsky and E. Sokatchev, “Supercurrent”, Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 28 (1978) 423, [Yad. Fiz.
      28 (1978) 825].
 [10] W. Lang, “Currents in supersymmetric gauge theories”, Nucl. Phys. B150 (1979) 201–220.
 [11] J. Zahn, “Wirkungs- und Lokalitätsprinzip für nichtkommutative skalare Feldtheorien”, Master’s
      thesis, Universität Hamburg, 2003.
 [12] H. C. Ohanian and R. Ruffini, Gravitation and Spacetime, third ed., (Cambridge Univ. Press,
      2013).
 [13] F. J. Belinfante, “On the spin angular momentum of mesons”, Physica 6 (1939) 887–898.
 [14] F. J. Belinfante, “On the current and the density of the electric charge, the energy, the linear
      momentum and the angular momentum of arbitrary fields”, Physica 7 (1940) 449.
 [15] G. Grensing, Structural Aspects of Quantum Field Theory and Noncommutative Geometry,
      (World Scientific Publ., 2013).
 [16] L. H. Ryder, Quantum Field Theory, second ed., (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1996).
 [17] M. Forger and H. Römer, “Currents and the energy momentum tensor in classical field theory: A
      fresh look at an old problem”, Annals Phys. 309 (2004) 306–389, arXiv:hep-th/0307199.
 [18] M. J. Gotay and J. E. Marsden, “Stress-energy-momentum tensors and the Belinfante-Rosenfeld
      formula”, Contemp. Math. 132 (1992) 367-392,
 [19] L. Landau and E. Lifshitz, The Classical Theory of Fields, Course of Theoretical Physics, Vol. 2 ,
      fourth ed., (Butterworth-Heinemann, 1980).



                                                   28
[20] A. J. Hanson, T. Regge, and C. Teitelboim, Constrained Hamiltonian Systems, (Roma:
     Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei, 1976).
[21] D. N. Blaschke, F. Gieres, M. Reboud and M. Schweda, “Poincaré transformations in the
     Hamiltonian formulation of gauge field theories”, talk presented by F. Gieres at the XXIVth
     International Conference on Integrable Systems and Quantum symmetries (ISQS-24), Prague,
     June 2016, manuscript in preparation.
[22] A. Duncan, The Conceptual Framework of Quantum Field Theory, (Oxford Univ. Press, 2012).
[23] D. J. Griffiths, “Resource letter EM-1: Electromagnetic momentum”, Am. J. Phys. 80 (2012)
     7–18.
[24] U. E. Schröder, Special Relativity, vol. 33 of World Sci. Lect. Notes Phys., (Singapore: World
     Scientific, 1990).
[25] C. Itzykson and J.-B. Zuber, Quantum Field Theory, Dover ed., (New York: Dover Publ. Inc.,
     2005).
[26] B. P. Kosyakov, Introduction to the Classical Theory of Particles and Fields, (Springer Verlag,
     2007).
[27] M. Gell-Mann and M. Lévy, “The axial vector current in beta decay”, Nuovo Cim. 16 (1960) 705.
[28] C. G. Callan Jr., S. R. Coleman, and R. Jackiw, “A new improved energy-momentum tensor”,
     Annals Phys. 59 (1970) 42–73.
[29] R. Jackiw and S.-Y. Pi, “Tutorial on scale and conformal symmetries in diverse dimensions”, J.
     Phys. A: Math. Theor. 44 (2011) 223001, arXiv:1101.4886 [math-ph].
[30] P. Di Francesco, P. Mathieu, and D. Sénéchal, Conformal Field Theory, Graduate Texts in
     Contemporary Physics, (New York: Springer, 1997).
[31] W. Thirring, Classical Mathematical Physics: Dynamical Systems and Field Theories, third ed.,
     (Springer Verlag, 1997).
[32] U. Sexl and H. K. Urbantke, Relativity, Groups, Particles: Special Relativity and Relativistic
     Symmetry in Field and Particle Physics, (Springer Verlag, 2001).
[33] S. W. Hawking and G. F. R. Ellis, The Large Scale Structure of Space-time, Cambridge
     Monographs on Mathematical Physics, (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1973).
[34] J. M. M. Senovilla and D. Garfinkle, “The 1965 Penrose singularity theorem”, Class. Quant.
     Grav. 32 (2015) 124008, arXiv:1410.5226 [gr-qc].
[35] R. M. Wald, General Relativity, (Chicago: Univ. Press, 1984).
[36] E. Poisson, A Relativist’s Toolkit: The Mathematics of Black-Hole Mechanics, (Cambridge Univ.
     Press, 2008).
[37] E. Eriksen and J. M. Leinaas, “Gauge invariance and the transformation properties of the
     electromagnetic four-potential”, Phys. Scripta 22 (1980) 199.
[38] Y. Takahashi, “Energy-momentum tensors in relativistic and non-relativistic classical field
     theory”, Fortschr. Phys. 34 (1986) 323–344.
[39] G. Muñoz, “Lagrangian field theories and energy-momentum tensors”, Am. J. Phys. 64 (1996)
     1153–1157.
[40] M. Montesinos and E. Flores, “Symmetric energy-momentum tensor in Maxwell, Yang-Mills, and
     Proca theories obtained using only Noether’s theorem”, Rev. Mex. Fis. 52 (2006) 29–36,
     arXiv:hep-th/0602190.
     R. E. Gamboa Saravi, “On the energy momentum tensor”, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 37 (2004)
     9573–9586, arXiv:math-ph/0306020.
[41] A. O. Barut, Electrodynamics and Classical Theory of Fields and Particles, Dover Books on
     Physics, (Dover Publ. Inc., 1981).
[42] L. Rosenfeld, “Sur le tenseur d’impulsion-énergie”, Mémoires Acad. Roy. de Belgique 18 (1940)
     1–30.


                                                 29
[43] M. Blagojević and F. W. Hehl, eds., Gauge Theories of Gravitation: A Reader with
     Commentaries, (World Scientific, 2013).
[44] F. W. Hehl, P. von der Heyde, G. D. Kerlick, and J. M. Nester, “General relativity with spin and
     torsion: Foundations and prospects”, Rev. Mod. Phys. 48 (1976) 393–416.
     R. T. Hammond, “Torsion gravity”, Rept. Prog. Phys. 65 (2002) 599–649.
[45] A. Trautman, “Einstein-Cartan theory”, in Encyclopedia of Mathematical Physics, J.-P.
     Françoise, G. L. Naber, and S. T. Tsou, eds., vol. 2, pp. 189–195, (Oxford: Elsevier, 2006).
     arXiv:gr-qc/0606062.
[46] F. W. Hehl, “On energy-momentum and spin/helicity of quark and gluon fields”, in Proceedings,
     15th Workshop on High Energy Spin Physics (DSPIN-13): Dubna, Russia, Oct 8-12, 2013,
     (Dubna: JINR, 2014). arXiv:1402.0261 [gr-qc].
[47] R. F. Streater and A. S. Wightman, PCT, spin and statistics, and all that, Princeton Landmarks
     in Mathematics and Physics, (Princeton Univ. Press, 2000).
[48] R. Haag, Local Quantum Physics: Fields, Particles, Algebras, second ed., Texts and Monographs
     in Physics, (Berlin: Springer Verlag, 1996).
[49] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, third ed., (Wiley, 1998).
[50] B. Felsager, Geometry, Particles and Fields, Graduate Texts in Contemporary Physics, (Springer
     Verlag, 1998).
[51] R. Utiyama, “Theory of invariant variation and the generalized canonical dynamics”, Prog.
     Theor. Phys. Suppl. 9 (1959) 19–44.
[52] H. Balasin, D. N. Blaschke, F. Gieres, and M. Schweda, “Wong’s equations and charged
     relativistic particles in non-commutative space”, SIGMA 10 (2014) 099, arXiv:1403.0255
     [hep-th].
[53] S. Deser, “Scale invariance and gravitational coupling”, Annals Phys. 59 (1970) 248–253.
[54] S. Deser, “Self-interaction and gauge invariance”, Gen. Rel. Grav. 1 (1970) 9–18,
     arXiv:gr-qc/0411023.
     S. Deser, “Gravity from self-interaction redux”, Gen. Rel. Grav. 42 (2010) 641–646,
     arXiv:0910.2975 [gr-qc].
[55] T. Ortín, Gravity and Strings, second ed., Cambridge Monographs on Mathematical Physics,
     (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2015).
[56] R. P. Feynman, F. B. Morinigo, and W. G. Wagner, Feynman Lectures On Gravitation, Frontiers
     in Physics, B. Hatfield ed., (Westview Press, 2002).
[57] N. Straumann, General Relativity, second ed., Graduate Texts in Physics, (Springer Verlag,
     2013).
     N. Straumann, “Reflections on gravity”, Concluding talk at the ESA-CERN Workshop, CERN,
     5-7 April 2000, arXiv:astro-ph/0006423.
[58] G. ’t Hooft (ed.), 50 years of Yang-Mills theory, (World Scientific Publ., 2005).
[59] N. D. Birrell and P. C. W. Davies, Quantum Fields in Curved Space, Cambridge Monogr. Math.
     Phys., (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1982).
[60] C. W. Misner, K. S. Thorne, and J. A. Wheeler, Gravitation, (New York: W. H. Freeman and
     Company, 1973).
[61] D. Hilbert, “Die Grundlagen der Physik. (Erste Mitteilung.)”, Nachr. d. K. Gesellsch. d. Wiss.
     zu Göttingen, Math.-Phys. Klasse 1915, Heft 3 (1915) 395–407.
[62] A. Einstein, “Feldgleichungen der Gravitation”, Preuss. Akad. Wiss., Sitzungsberichte 1915
     (Teil 2) (1915) 844–847.
     A. Einstein, “Die Grundlage der allgemeinen Relativitätstheorie”, Annalen Phys. 49 (1916)
     769–822.




                                                 30
[63] L. F. Abbott and S. Deser, “Stability of Gravity with a Cosmological Constant”, Nucl. Phys.
     B195 (1982) 76.
[64] M. Dubois-Violette and J. Madore, “Conservation laws and integrability conditions for
     gravitational and Yang-Mills field equations”, Commun. Math. Phys. 108 (1987) 213.
[65] G. Barnich and F. Brandt, “Covariant theory of asymptotic symmetries, conservation laws and
     central charges”, Nucl. Phys. B633 (2002) 3–82, arXiv:hep-th/0111246.
[66] H. Stephani, Relativity — An Introduction to Special and General Relativity, third ed.,
     (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2006).
[67] L. O’Raifeartaigh, The Dawning of Gauge Theory, Princeton Series in Physics, (Princeton Univ.
     Press, 1997).
[68] R. A. Bertlmann, Anomalies in Quantum Field Theory, vol. 91 of International Series of
     Monographs on Physics, (Oxford, UK: Clarendon, 1996).
[69] A. Rouet and R. Stora, “Ward identities and trace identities for the stress-energy tensor”, Lett.
     Nuovo Cim. 4 (1972) 136–138.
[70] A. Rouet and R. Stora, “Noether’s theorem and Ward identities in renormalizable theories”,
     Lett. Nuovo Cim. 4 (1972) 139.
[71] R. Stora, “Lagrangian field theory”, in Particle Physics, Proceedings of the Les Houches Summer
     School on Theoretical Physics 1971, C. DeWitt and C. Itzykson, eds., pp. 1–80, (Gordon and
     Breach, 1973).
[72] M. Srednicki, Quantum Field Theory, (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2007).
[73] M. Dütsch and F. M. Boas, “The Master Ward identity”, Rev. Math. Phys. 14 (2002) 977,
     arXiv:hep-th/0111101.
[74] S. G. Avery and B. U. W. Schwab, “Noether’s second theorem and Ward identities for gauge
     symmetries”, JHEP 02 (2016) 031, arXiv:1510.07038 [hep-th].
[75] S. Coleman, Aspects of Symmetry, (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1985).
[76] S. A. Fulling, Aspects of Quantum Field Theory in Curved Space-time, vol. 17 of London Math.
     Soc. Student Texts, (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1989).
[77] M. J. Duff, “Twenty years of the Weyl anomaly”, Class. Quant. Grav. 11 (1994) 1387–1404,
     arXiv:hep-th/9308075 [hep-th].
[78] R. Blumenhagen, D. Lüst, and S. Theisen, Basic Concepts of String Theory, Theoretical and
     Mathematical Physics, (Springer Verlag, 2013).
[79] Y. Nakayama, “A lecture note on scale invariance vs conformal invariance”, Phys. Rept. 569
     (2014) 1–93, arXiv:1302.0884 [hep-th], Lectures given at Taiwan Central University for the
     5th Taiwan School on Strings and Fields.
     A. Dymarsky, Z. Komargodski, A. Schwimmer, and S. Theisen, “On scale and conformal
     invariance in four dimensions”, JHEP 10 (2015) 171, arXiv:1309.2921 [hep-th].
[80] D. N. Blaschke, R. Carballo-Rubio, and E. Mottola, “Fermion pairing and the scalar boson of
     the 2D conformal anomaly”, JHEP 12 (2014) 153, arXiv:1407.8523 [hep-th].
[81] C. Becchi, A. Rouet, and R. Stora, “The Abelian Higgs-Kibble model: Unitarity of the S
     operator”, Phys. Lett. B52 (1974) 344.
     C. Becchi, A. Rouet, and R. Stora, “Renormalization of the Abelian Higgs-Kibble model”,
     Commun. Math. Phys. 42 (1975) 127–162.
[82] C. Becchi, A. Rouet, and R. Stora, “Renormalization of gauge theories”, Annals Phys. 98 (1976)
     287–321.
[83] I. V. Tyutin, “Gauge invariance in field theory and statistical physics in operator formalism”,
     arXiv:0812.0580 [hep-th], (Lebedev Institute preprint in Russian 1975: LEBEDEV-75-39).
[84] C. Becchi, A. Rouet, and R. Stora, “Gauge field models”, in Renormalization Theory,
     Proceedings of the NATO Advanced Study Institute, Erice, August 1975, G. Velo and A. S.


                                                 31
     Wightman, eds., vol. 23 of NATO Advanced Study Institutes Series, Series C, pp. 269–297,
     (Dortrecht: Springer, 1976).
 [85] R. Stora, “Continuum gauge theories”, in New Developments in Quantum Field Theory and
      Statistical Mechanics Cargèse 1976, XVI Latin American School of Physics Caracas, Venezuela
      1976, M. Lévy and P. Mitter, eds., vol. 26 of NATO Advanced Study Institutes Series,
      pp. 201–224, (Springer US, 1977).
 [86] C. Becchi, A. Rouet, and R. Stora, “Renormalizable theories with symmetry breaking”, in Field
      Theory, Quantization and Statistical Physics, E. Tirapegui, ed., vol. 6 of Mathematical Physics
      and Applied Mathematics, (Springer Verlag, 1981).
 [87] O. Piguet and A. Rouet, “Symmetries in perturbative quantum field theory”, Phys. Rept. 76
      (1981) 1.
 [88] C. Becchi, “Lectures on the renormalization of gauge theories”, in Relativity, Groups and
      Topology, Les Houches Summer School on Theoretical Physics, August 1983, B. DeWitt and
      R. Stora, eds., (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1984).
 [89] O. Piguet and S. P. Sorella, Algebraic Renormalization: Perturbative Renormalization,
      Symmetries and Anomalies, vol. 28 of Lect. Notes Phys.: Monographs, (Springer Verlag, 1995).
 [90] R. Stora, “Remarks on Slavnov symmetries”, in Renormalization of Quantum Field Theories
      with Non-linear Field Transformations, Proceedings of a workshop at Ringberg Castle Tegernsee,
      1987, P. Breitenlohner, D. Maison, and K. Sibold, eds., vol. 303 of Lecture Notes in Physics,
      pp. 213–219, (Springer Verlag, 1987).
      R. Stora, “The Slavnov symmetry, cousins and descendants”, in BRS symmetry, Proceedings of
      the International Symposium on the Occasion of its 20th Anniversary, Kyoto, Sept. 1995,
      M. Abe, N. Nakanishi, and I. Ojima, eds., pp. 1–16, (Tokyo, Japan: Univ. Acad. Press, 1996).
 [91] D. H. T. Franco and O. Piguet, “Algebraic renormalization”, Scholarpedia 8 no. 11, (2013) 8336.
      http://www.scholarpedia.org/article/Algebraic_renormalization.
 [92] A. Boresch, S. Emery, O. Moritsch, M. Schweda, T. Sommer, and H. Zerrouki, Applications of
      Noncovariant Gauges in the Algebraic Renormalization Procedure, (World Scientific, 1998).
 [93] J. Wess and B. Zumino, “Consequences of anomalous Ward identities”, Phys. Lett. B37 (1971)
      95–97.
 [94] B. Zumino, “Chiral anomalies and differential geometry”, in Relativity, Groups and Topology,
      Les Houches Summer School on Theoretical Physics, August 1983, B. DeWitt and R. Stora, eds.,
      (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1984).
      http://www.osti.gov/energycitations/product.biblio.jsp?osti_id=5461614.
 [95] R. Stora, “Algebraic structure and topological origin of anomalies”, in Progress in Gauge Field
      Theory, Cargèse Summer Institute, Sept. 1983, G. ’t Hooft, A. Jaffe, H. Lehmann, P. K. Mitter,
      I. M. Singer, and R. Stora, eds., vol. 115 of NATO Advanced Study Institutes Series, Series B,
      pp. 543–562, (Plenum Press, 1984).
 [96] J. Mañes, R. Stora, and B. Zumino, “Algebraic study of chiral anomalies”, Commun. Math.
      Phys. 102 (1985) 157.
 [97] F. Langouche, T. Schücker, and R. Stora, “Gravitational anomalies of the adler-bardeen type”,
      Phys. Lett. B145 (1984) 342–346.
 [98] G. Girardi, R. Grimm, and R. Stora, “Chiral anomalies in n = 1 supersymmetric Yang-Mills
      theories”, Phys. Lett. B156 (1985) 203–208.
      S. Ferrara, A. Masiero, M. Porrati, and R. Stora, “Bardeen anomaly and Wess-Zumino term in
      the supersymmetric standard model”, Nucl. Phys. B417 (1994) 238–256,
      arXiv:hep-th/9311038.
 [99] L. Baulieu, C. Becchi, and R. Stora, “On the covariant quantization of the free bosonic string”,
      Phys. Lett. B180 (1986) 55–60.
[100] S. Lazzarini and R. Stora, “Ward identities for conformal models”, in Stochastics, Algebra and


                                                  32
     Analysis in Classical and Quantum Dynamics, S. Albeverio, Ph. Blanchard, and D. Testard,
     eds., Proceedings of the IVth French-German Encounter on Mathematics and Physics, CIRM,
     Marseille, France, February/March 1988, vol. 59 of Mathematics and Its Applications,
     pp. 169–172, (Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1990).
     S. Lazzarini and R. Stora, “Ward identities for Lagrangian conformal models”, in Knots, topology
     and quantum field theories, Proceedings of the Johns Hopkins Workshop on Current Problems in
     Particle Theory 13, Florence, 1989, L. Lusanna, ed., (World Scientific Publ., 1989).
[101] S. Ouvry, R. Stora, and P. van Baal, “On the algebraic characterization of Witten’s topological
      Yang-Mills theory”, Phys. Lett. B220 (1989) 159.
[102] M. Henneaux and C. Teitelboim, Quantization of Gauge Systems, (Princeton Univ. Press, 1992).
[103] D. M. Gitman and I. V. Tyutin, Quantization of Fields with Constraints, Springer Series in
      Nuclear and Particle Physics, (Springer Verlag, 1990).
[104] H. J. Rothe and K. D. Rothe, Classical and Quantum Dynamics of Constrained Hamiltonian
      Systems, vol. 81 of World Sci. Lect. Notes Phys., (World Scientific Publ., 2010).
[105] N. M. Nikolov, R. Stora, and I. Todorov, “Renormalization of massless Feynman amplitudes in
      configuration space”, Rev. Math. Phys. 26 (2014) 1430002, arXiv:1307.6854 [hep-th].
[106] R. Stora, “Renormalized perturbation theory: A missing chapter”, Int. J. Geom. Meth. Mod.
      Phys. 5 (2008) 1345–1360, arXiv:0901.3426 [hep-th].
[107] D. Kastler and R. Stora, “A differential geometric setting for BRS transformations and
      anomalies I”, J. Geom. Phys. 3 (1986) 437–482.
      R. Stora, “From Koszul complexes to gauge fixing”, in 50 years of Yang-Mills theory,
      G. ’t Hooft, ed., pp. 137–167, (World Scientific Publ., 2005).
      R. Stora, F. Thuillier, and J.-C. Wallet, “Algebraic structure of cohomological field theory
      models and equivariant cohomology”, in Infinite Dimensional Geometry, noncommutative
      Geometry, Operator Algebras and Fundamental Interactions, R. Coquereaux,
      M. Dubois-Violette, and P. Flad, eds., pp. 266–297, Proc. 1st Caribbean Spring School of
      Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, Saint Francois, Guadeloupe 1993, (World Scientific, 1995).
      R. Stora, “Exercises in equivariant cohomology”, in Quantum Fields and Quantum Space Time,
      G. ’t Hooft, A. Jaffe, G. Mack, P. K. Mitter, and R. Stora, eds., Proc. NATO Advanced Study
      Institute, Cargèse, France 1996, vol. 364 of NATO Advanced Study Institutes Series, Series B,
      pp. 265–279, (Plenum, 1997), arXiv:hep-th/9611114.
[108] A. Das, Lectures on Quantum Field Theory, (World Scientific, 2008).
[109] L. Frappat, A. Sciarrino, and P. Sorba, Dictionary of Lie Algebras and Superalgebras, (Academic
      Press, 2000). arXiv:hep-th/9607161.
[110] D. Bleecker, Gauge Theory And Variational Principles, Global Analysis, Pure and Applied, Vol.
      1, (Reading, USA: Addison-Wesley, 1981).




                                                 33
