                                                          Classical Chern-Simons Theory, Part 1



                                                                          Daniel S. Freed

                                                                    Department of Mathematics
                                                                    University of Texas at Austin
arXiv:hep-th/9206021v1 4 Jun 1992




                                                                              June 4, 1992



                                        The formulations of Classical Mechanics by Lagrange and Hamilton are the mod-
                                    ern foundation of classical physics [Ar]. Not only do these theories describe the mo-
                                    tion of systems of particles, but Maxwell’s theory of electromagnetism, as well as
                                    other field theories, can also be formulated in Lagrangian and Hamiltonian terms.
                                    A Lagrangian field theory is defined by a local functional of the fields, called the
                                    lagrangian, and its integral over spacetime,1 called the action. The classical so-
                                    lutions of the field theory are the critical points of the action. In particular, the
                                    minima satisfy the “least action principle” of Maupertius.2 The Hamiltonian the-
                                    ory is defined by a function, the hamiltonian, on phase space, or more generally
                                    on a symplectic manifold. The classical motion of the system is then described by
                                    Hamilton’s equations, whose solutions are integral curves of the symplectic gradient
                                    vector field of the hamiltonian. For many mechanical systems of particles, which
                                    should be regarded as 0 + 1 dimensional field theories, there is both a Lagrangian
                                    and Hamiltonian formulation. Then the relationship between them is expressed
                                    by the Legendre transform, if the lagrangian is nondegenerate. A typical example
                                    is the motion of a particle on a Riemannian manifold M . The action of the La-
                                    grangian theory is the energy of a path in M . The hamiltonian is the norm square
                                    function on the tangent bundle T M , which obtains a symplectic structure from
                                    the metric. For higher dimensional field theories the Hamiltonian formulation only
                                    makes sense on spacetimes which are globally a product of space and time, that
                                    is, on (d + 1)-dimensional manifolds which are the product of a d-manifold with a
                                    1-manifold. A field on this product manifold is a path of fields in space. Symmetry
                                    plays an important role in classical physics; many mechanical systems admit groups

                                       The author is supported by NSF grant DMS-8805684, an Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship,
                                    a Presidential Young Investigators award, and by the O’Donnell Foundation.
                                       1 Here we refer to relativistic field theories with the Euclidean signature. A theory has a fixed

                                    dimension d + 1 for the “spacetimes”, which consist of d space dimensions and 1 time dimension.
                                    Since we are in the Euclidean framework, the term ‘spacetime’ is a misnomer, but we use it
                                    anyway.
                                       2 See [Fey,§19] for a delightful exposition. Feynman is adamant that the principle of least

                                    action is the fundamental physical principle of classical field theories; his path integral is the
                                    corresponding approach to quantum field theories.

                                                                                                                 Typeset by AMS-TEX
                                                                                     1
of symmetries. Noether discovered that symmetries are linked to conservation prin-
ciples. This leads to the study of Noether currents in the Lagrangian theory and
moment maps in the Hamiltonian theory.
   The Chern-Simons form of a connection, introduced in [CS], can be viewed as
the lagrangian of a classical field theory. In this paper we study the 3 = 2 + 1 di-
mensional case. We are principally motivated by recent work of Witten [W], who
demonstrates that the quantization of this classical theory leads to new topolog-
ical invariants. Our study of the classical theory clarifies certain features which
are reflected in the quantum theory. In the course of our study we found that
the classical Chern-Simons theory has many subtle aspects which provoke some
refinements of the usual mathematical formulations of field theories. However, one
should be aware that the Chern-Simons theory differs from most field theories in
two important respects. First, the theory is topological (generally covariant) in
that it is defined on oriented manifolds without any choice of metric. Hence it
admits diffeomorphism groups as symmetries, whereas the usual examples admit
only isometries. Second, the lagrangian (1.26) involves only first powers of first
derivatives of the fields, which leads to a first order Euler-Lagrange equation (3.4);
the usual examples involve second derivatives or first derivatives squared, and so
lead to second order equations of motion.
   Everything is derived from the action. This principle, articulated by many the-
oretical physicists, places the Lagrangian formulation ahead of the Hamiltonian
formulation. In fact, the latter is derived from the former. In many field theories
one writes down the action and verifies its fundamental properties immediately; by
contrast in §2 we take many pages to define the Chern-Simons action. If X is a
closed, oriented 3-manifold, then the action is a complex number with unit norm.
This is the exponential of 2πi times the usual action, which is a real number de-
termined modulo the integers. The fact that the action not a real number, but is
only defined up to integers, leads to the interesting geometry of the theory. The
reality of the action, which implies that the exponential has unit norm, reflects
the unitarity of the theory. If X has a nonempty boundary, then the action is an
element of unit norm in an abstract metrized complex line which depends on the
restriction of the field to ∂X. We call this line the Chern-Simons line.3 Thus the
Lagrangian theory assigns a metrized line to every field on a space (closed, oriented
2-manifold) Y , and a unit element in the line of the boundary field for every field
on a spacetime (compact, oriented 3-manifold) X. In most field theories these lines
are canonically trivial; the nontriviality of these lines in the Chern-Simons theory
is why this theory illuminates the mathematical structure of classical field theory
so vividly. We remark that it is crucial to construct these lines precisely, and not
just up to isomorphism. The characteristic properties of the Lagrangian theory
are spelled out in Theorem 2.19, which is an axiomatization of topological classical
    3 Instead of complex lines with inner products we can restrict to the elements of unit norm,

which form a principal homogeneous space for the circle group. Many discussions of classical
and quantum Chern-Simons theory replace the Chern-Simons line bundle (over the moduli space
of flat connections; see below) with a determinant line bundle. Although these two bundles
may be isomorphic if appropriately chosen, the Chern-Simons action leads directly to the Chern-
Simons line bundle, not the determinant line bundle. From this perspective the determinant line
bundle is extraneous to the theory. Observe that the Chern-Simons line bundle is defined by a
cohomology class in H 4 (BG), whereas the determinant line bundle is defined by a representation
of G. However, the determinant line bundle most likely enters into another theory, whose action
is the η invariant of Atiyah-Patodi-Singer.
                                               2
field theory. The Chern-Simons action is invariant under a large symmetry group
(of gauge transformations), which we discuss below.
    The most important property of a Lagrangian field theory is locality. Fields are
local; they can be cut and pasted. (A formal statement looks very similar to the
definition of a sheaf.) The action is local in that it adds when we glue fields together.
We call this a gluing law ; it is stated precisely in Theorem 2.19(d). All of our
constructions in this paper are local, and so lead to gluing laws: Theorem 2.19(d),
Proposition 4.4(d), Proposition 4.11, Theorem 4.26(d), and Proposition 5.29.
    So far we have discussed general properties of field theories. Chern-Simons theory
is a gauge theory, so in §1 we review the geometry of connections on principal
bundles with compact structure group G. Our exposition is slanted toward field
theory. For example, we emphasize cutting and pasting of connections. At the end
of this section we introduce the Chern-Simons 3-form of a connection, which is our
lagrangian. Chern-Simons forms are parametrized by invariant bilinear forms on
the Lie algebra of G. To get an action which is well-defined up to integers, we
must restrict to a certain lattice of integral forms. For simple, simply connected
groups like SU (2) these forms (or cohomology classes) are parametrized by the
integers (6.2). This integer is usually called the “level” of the theory. This is
sufficient to define the Chern-Simons action if G is connected and simply connected,
as we assume throughout this paper. But for a general compact Lie group G
we need to choose a refinement of this bilinear form to define the Chern-Simons
action. This is (up to isomorphism) a cohomology class in H 4 (BG) = H 4 (BG; Z),
where BG is the classifying space of G; the integral bilinear forms are in natural
1:1 correspondence with the image of H 4 (BG) in H 4 (BG; R). The theories for
arbitrary compact Lie groups are the subject of Part 2 of this paper [F2]. The
importance of the general case in the study of rational conformal field theories
has been emphasized by Moore and Seiberg [MS]. The definition of the action for
the general case was sketched by Dijkgraaf and Witten [DW]. However, they use
singular cochains, and it is not possible to discuss smoothness (of the Chern-Simons
line bundle, for example) in their framework.
    The classical solutions in Chern-Simons theory are flat connections. We derive
the Euler-Lagrange equations at the beginning of §3, where we also discuss a lit-
tle of the geometry of the space of flat connections. Mostly in §3 we study the
Chern-Simons action on product manifolds4 X = [0, 1] × Y ; that is, we study the
Hamiltonian theory. Then the action can be interpreted as the parallel transport
of a unitary connection on the Chern-Simons line bundle formed over the space of
fields on the boundary (Proposition 3.17). The abstract argument of Appendix B
shows that the existence of this connection depends only on the basic properties of
the action, in particular the gluing law, not on particular features of this theory, and
so should exist in any Lagrangian field theory. However, our proof in §3 proceeds by
direct calculation. The curvature of this connection (times i/2π) is the symplectic
structure (3.18) of the Hamiltonian theory.5 Notice that the symplectic form auto-
matically satisfies an integrality condition, the integrality condition in “geometric
quantization” theory, as it is the curvature of a line bundle. Since the Chern-Simons
    4 We write ‘[0, 1]’ first in this product so that the orientations work out properly. This should

be done quite generally for homotopies and bordisms.
    5 This geometric point of view on the relationship between the Lagrangian and Hamiltonian

theories appears to be well-known (see [Ax], for example), though it is not often expressed in the
literature.
                                                 3
theory is topological, the hamiltonian function is identically zero—there is no local
motion. The symmetries in the theory—gauge transformations—lift to the Chern-
Simons line bundle over the space of fields; this lift is constructed directly from
the Chern-Simons action. From this lift one computes a moment map (3.19) for
the symmetry on the space of fields. Not only does the Lagrangian formulation
guarantee the existence of a moment map, but it also constructs one (via this ac-
tion on the line bundle) in situations where the moment map is not unique.6 The
space of classical solutions on the infinite cylinder [0, ∞) × Y is also a symplectic
manifold, in this case the symplectic quotient of the space of fields. The space of
classical solutions on an arbitrary 3-manifold with boundary, which is not neces-
sarily a product, maps onto a Lagrangian submanifold of the symplectic manifold
attached to the boundary (Proposition 3.27). Not only the symplectic form, but
also the Chern-Simons line bundle with connection are trivial on this submanifold.
The Hamiltonian theory is then the assignment of a symplectic manifold to every
space Y and a Lagrangian submanifold to every spacetime X.
   One feature of the Chern-Simons theory which is not usually considered in stan-
dard field theories is the geometry of the theory on spaces (as opposed to space-
times) with boundary, here 2-manifolds with boundary. In the quantum theory [W]
these are especially important and lead to an “exact solution” of the path integral.
In §4 and §5 we construct the classical theory on surfaces with boundary. Our
constructions depend on a closely related (1 + 1) dimensional field theory, the Wess-
Zumino-Witten theory, which is discussed in Appendix A. In these constructions we
generalize the theory on closed surfaces and so construct complex lines associated
to connections on surfaces with boundary. To accomplish this we must introduce
certain trivializing data on the boundary of the surface. Hence in §4 we make a
digression into the geometry of connections on the circle. In particular, we discuss
the universal bundle and properties of the holonomy map (Lemma 4.18). We then
construct the Chern-Simons lines, but only if we suitably restrict the values of the
boundary holonomies (Theorem 4.26). These lines fit together to form a (Chern-
Simons) line bundle over the moduli space of flat connections on the surface with
boundary, now with fixed boundary holonomies. We discuss this moduli space at
the end of §4 and derive a formula for its dimension (4.44). In §5 we construct a
connection on the Chern-Simons line bundle and compute its curvature (Proposi-
tion 5.9). This line bundle and connection depends on the trivializing boundary
data. This dependence will be more clear in Part 2, where we also construct geomet-
ric objects similar to line bundles with connection which exist without restriction
on the boundary holonomies.
   In many ways the classical Chern-Simons theory unifies the gauge-theoretic geo-
metrical objects in low dimensions that are associated with a compact Lie group G
and an integral bilinear form on its Lie algebra:7 a characteristic class of G bundles
over a closed oriented 4-manifold, the Chern-Simons invariant of a connection over
a closed oriented 3-manifold, and the line bundle with connection over the moduli
space of flat connections on a closed oriented 2-manifold. There are corresponding
geometric objects over manifolds with boundary, as we discussed earlier. There is
even something one can say in 1 dimension, but this is more complicated. These
    6 This occurs in Chern-Simons theory if the center of the gauge group G has positive dimension,

which does not happen in the groups we consider here, but certainly there are compact Lie groups
(e.g. G = T, the circle group) where this occurs. They will be considered in Part 2.
    7 More precisely, a class in H 4 (BG).

                                                4
constructions are all fit in nicely with smooth Deligne cohomology.8 In fact, they
can be constructed by integration of Deligne cocycles over these various manifolds.
We develop this integration theory in [F1], and discuss the Chern-Simons theory
from this point of view in Part 2 of this paper [F2]. Finally, then, the Chern-Simons
theory looks like standard field theories—the action is an integral over spacetime.
A different integration theory (for singular cocycles) can be used when the gauge
group is finite [FQ]. There is probably an analogous integration theory for K-theory
and superconnections. The outstanding question is to construct integration theo-
ries which give the corresponding objects in quantum Chern-Simons theory. (When
the gauge group is finite, the standard path integral is a finite sum, and the theory
can be constructed directly [FQ].)
   We conclude with a final comment about the symmetries in Chern-Simons theory,
or more generally in any classical gauge theory. Namely, the symmetries form a
groupoid rather than a group. A groupoid is a “group with states”. In gauge theory
the states are the various principal bundles over a given manifold, and the group
elements are isomorphisms between principal bundles (which cover the identity
map on the base). For each principal bundle the automorphisms form a group—
the group of gauge transformations. However, the larger symmetry of the groupoid
enters since there is no canonical identification of two isomorphic bundles with
connections; in other words, connections have automorphisms. This is particularly
important when we glue together bundles and connections. This extra symmetry
has nontrivial consequences, some of which are manifest in the quantum theory,
and we find that they justify our use of categorical language.
   Several closely related manuscripts appeared while this work was in progress.
Among them is Axelrod’s thesis [Ax], which also treats the classical Chern-Simons
theory (and other topics). He considers more examples of classical theories, and
he goes further towards formulating axioms for classical topological field theories
in general. Daskalopoulos and Wentworth [DasW] also construct line bundles with
connection over the moduli spaces of flat connections on a surface with bound-
ary. Their connection differs from ours; they found a relationship between bound-
ary holonomies and representations that our connection does not exhibit (cf. §5).
Chang [Ch] constructs a determinant line bundle with connection over these moduli
spaces.
   Over the two years this work has been in progress, I talked to many people
about the contents of this paper. I thank all of them, and especially single out
Scott Axelrod, Joseph Bernstein, Sheldon Chang, George Daskalopoulos, Frank
Quinn, Karen Uhlenbeck, Alan Weinstein, and Richard Wentworth for illuminating
conversations. This paper grew out of lectures given at the University of Texas
in the spring of 1990. I thank the audience for their feedback. I’d also thank the
Aspen Center for Physics and the Regional Geometry Institute in Park City for
their hospitality while some of this work was carried out. Finally, my thinking
about field theories has been stimulated greatly by Graeme Segal’s work in this
area.




  8 Gawȩdzki [Ga] treated the action in Wess-Zumino-Witten theory using smooth Deligne coho-

mology. Related ideas also appear in work of Brylinski.
                                             5
                       §1 Connections on principal bundles
   In this section we review some basics about Lie groups and connections on princi-
pal bundles. We consider arbitrary compact Lie groups. Although subsequent sec-
tions of this paper only treat connected and simply connected groups, in Part 2 [F2]
we take up the general case. Beyond textbook material, which we review to establish
notation, we discuss carefully how to cut and paste connections (Proposition 1.24).
This establishes the fact that connections can serve as local fields in a field theory.
Then we introduce the lagrangian, the Chern-Simons form (1.26), and state its
basic properties (Proposition 1.27). This form is only defined on the total space
of a bundle, not on the base, and this leads to some of the rich geometry of the
theory. Since connections have automorphisms, we use the language of categories
to describe the space of all connections.
   Let G be a compact Lie group. The identity component G0 is a normal subgroup
with quotient the finite group Γ = π0 G of components:

(1.1)                             1−
                                   → G0 −
                                        →G−
                                          →Γ−
                                            → 1.

Then there is a finite covering

(1.2)                             1−
                                   →A−
                                     →Gf0 −
                                          → G0 −
                                               →1

for some finite abelian group A such that

(1.3)                             f0 ∼
                                  G  = T × K1 × · · · × Ks ,

where T is a torus and Ki are connected, simply connected simple groups. The
basic examples of compact Lie groups are finite groups, the circle group T, and
the connected, simply connected simple groups (of type A,B,C,D,E,F,G); equa-
tions (1.1) and (1.2) show that all others are products of these up to finite covers
and finite extensions.
   The Lie algebra g of G is the vector space of left invariant vector fields on G
endowed with the Lie bracket. The Lie algebras of G, G0 , and G f0 coincide. There
is a natural g-valued 1-form θ on G which assigns to each vector its left invariant
extension.9 This Maurer-Cartan form satisfies

                                        L∗g θ = θ,
(1.4)
                                        Rg∗ θ = Adg−1 θ,

where Lg : G → G is left multiplication by g ∈ G, the map Rg : G → G is right
multiplication, and Adg = Lg ◦ Rg−1 is the adjoint map. Its differential satisfies the
Maurer-Cartan equation
                                      1
                                dθ + [θ ∧ θ] = 0;
                                      2
it is a simple consequence of the relationship of d to the Lie bracket.
    A principal G bundle P → X is a manifold P with a free right G action; the
quotient X is then also a manifold. Notice that if G is finite, then P is a regular
  9 It is often denoted g −1 dg for matrix groups.

                                                 6
covering space of X.10 In general, the fiber Px over x is a space on which G acts
simply transitively by right multiplication. Hence for each p ∈ Px there is an
isomorphism of right G-spaces

                                      τp : G −→ Px
                                           g 7−→ p · g.

The “coordinate change” τp−1   ′ τp = Lg , where g ∈ G is the unique element with

p′ = p · g. Hence left invariant tensors on G induce tensors on Px . Thus we identify
Tp Px ∼
      = g for all p ∈ Px . Dually, the Maurer-Cartan form θ induces a form θx on Px
which satisfies

                                     Rg∗ θx = Adg−1 θx ,
                                           1
(1.5)                              dθx + [θx ∧ θx ] = 0.
                                           2

Here Rg : Px → Px is the right action of g ∈ G. If there is a global section s : X → P
then P is trivial; the map

                                  τs : X × G −→ P
                                        hx, gi 7−→ s(x) · g

is a trivialization. Any principal G bundle is locally trivial.
   Suppose h : G ֒→ G′ is an inclusion of compact Lie groups and P → X a principal
G bundle. Then the induced G′ bundle PG′ → X is the quotient
(1.6)                     .
PG′ = P ×G G′ = P × G′ hp, g ′ i ∼ hp · g, h(g −1 )g ′ i,   p ∈ P, g ′ ∈ G′ , g ∈ G.

There is a natural inclusion

                                     hP : P −→ PG′
(1.7)
                                           p 7−→ hp, ei

which covers the identity map on X.
   A map of principal G bundles ϕ : P ′ → P is a smooth map of manifolds which
commutes with the G action. Hence it induces a map ϕ̄ : X ′ → X on the quotient
spaces. When X ′ = X and ϕ̄ is the identity we term ϕ a morphism of principal
bundles over X. If, in addition, P ′ = P then ϕ is termed an automorphism of P ,
or a gauge transformation. In this case there is an associated map

                                       gϕ : P −→ G

defined by the equation

(1.8)                                ϕ(p) = p · gϕ (p).
   10 However, the categories of principal bundles and regular covering spaces differ: Maps of

principal bundles commute with the group action, whereas maps of covering spaces need not.
                                              7
Clearly maps of principal G bundles compose, and the set of gauge transformations
of P forms a group GP . If h : G ֒→ G1 is an inclusion, and ϕ : P ′ → P a map, then
there is an induced map PG′ 1 → PG1 on the G1 extensions. Also, if P → X is a
principal G bundle and ϕ̄ : X ′ → X a smooth map, then there is an induced bundle
ϕ̄∗ P → X ′ and a bundle map ϕ : ϕ̄∗ P → P covering ϕ̄.
    A connection on P → X is a g-valued 1-form Θ such that

(1.9)                                 i∗x Θ = θx ,
(1.10)                             Rg∗ Θ = Adg−1 Θ,

where ix : Px ֒→ P is the inclusion of the fiber over x ∈ X and Rg : P → P is
the right translation by g ∈ G. Connections can be constructed locally using local
trivializations. Since (1.9) and (1.10) are convex conditions, local connections patch
together via a partition of unity into global connections. Hence connections exist.
In fact, (1.9) and (1.10) are affine conditions, so the set AP of all connections on P
is an affine subspace of Ω1P (g), the vector space of g-valued 1-forms on P . A tangent
vector to the space of connections is a g-valued 1-form Θ on P such that

(1.11)                                 i∗x Θ̇ = 0,
(1.12)                             Rg∗ Θ̇ = Adg−1 Θ̇.

The vector space of forms satisfying (1.11) and (1.12) is denoted Ω1X (gP ), since Θ̇ is
the lift to P of a 1-form on X transforming in the adjoint bundle gP = P ×G g.
The curvature Ω of a connection Θ is the g-valued 2-form
                                         1
(1.13)                           Ω = dΘ + [Θ ∧ Θ];
                                         2
it satisfies

(1.14)                             Rg∗ Ω = Adg−1 Ω,
(1.15)                                 i∗x Ω = 0.

(This last equation follows from (1.5).) Hence the curvature is an element of Ω2X (gP ).
Differentiating (1.13) we obtain the Bianchi identity

(1.16)                            dΩ + [Θ ∧ Ω] = 0.

Introduce the covariant derivative

                                   dΘ = d + ad(Θ).

Then the Bianchi identity can be rewritten as

                                       dΘ Ω = 0.

   Suppose h : G → G′ is an inclusion and Θ a G connection on P → X. Then
there is an induced G′ connection ΘG′ on PG′ → X. Namely, define the g′ -valued
1-form
                                                      
(1.17)                 (ΘG′ )hp,g′ i = ḣ Ad(g′ )−1 Θp + (θ′ )g′
                                           8
on P × G′ , where θ′ is the Maurer-Cartan form on G′ , and ḣ : g ֒→ g′ the induced
inclusion of Lie algebras. From (1.4) and (1.10) we see that (1.17) vanishes along the
orbits of the right G action on P × G′ and
                                          is invariant under that action, so passes
to a g′ -valued 1-form on PG′ = P × G′ G (cf. (1.6)). Properties (1.9) and (1.10)
are easily verified, so ΘG′ is a connection. The pullback of ΘG′ under the natural
map hP : P → PG′ (1.7) can be identified with the original connection Θ.
    Let ϕ : P ′ → P be a map of principal bundles and Θ a connection on P ; then
ϕ (Θ) is a connection on P ′ . In particular, the group GP of gauge transformations
  ∗

acts (on the right) on the space of connections AP . Suppose ϕ : P → P is a
gauge transformation with associated map gϕ : P → G (1.8). Let φϕ = gϕ∗ (θ) be
the pullback of the Maurer-Cartan form. Then a basic equation in the theory of
connections asserts

(1.18)                            ϕ∗ (Θ) = Adgϕ−1 Θ + φϕ .

By contrast the curvature transforms as a tensor:

(1.19)                                ϕ∗ (Ω) = Adgϕ−1 Ω.

An automorphism of a connection Θ is a gauge transformation which satisfies
ϕ∗ (Θ) = Θ. Equation (1.18) is then a first order differential equation for ϕ, which
asserts that gϕ is parallel. Since parallel sections over connected manifolds are
determined by their value at a single point, we have proved the following.
Proposition 1.20. If ϕ is an automorphism of Θ, then gϕ is parallel. In par-
ticular, if X is connected and ϕ is the identity at some point of X, then ϕ is the
identity on X.
   We will often encounter connections over cylinders. The following lemma gives
a standard form for such connections.
Lemma 1.21. Suppose Q → Y is a G bundle over a manifold Y , and [0, ∞)×Q →
[0, ∞)× Y the pullback to the cylinder over Y . Let Θ be a connection on [0, ∞)× Q,
which we write as

              Θ = ηt + ξt dt,        t ∈ [0, ∞),       ηt ∈ Ω1Q (g),   ξt ∈ Ω0Q (g).

Then there exists a unique gauge transformation ϕ of [0, ∞) × Q which satisfies

(1.22)                                      ϕ {0}×Q = id,
(1.23)                                      ϕ∗ (Θ) = η̃t .

In other words, the transformed connection has no dt component.11
Proof. Let gt : Q → G be the map associated to ϕ {t}×Q , and φt = gt∗ (θ). Then
(1.22) asserts g0 = id, and by (1.18) we see that (1.23) is equivalent to

                                                      ∂
                                   Adg−1 ξt + φt (       ) = 0.
                                        t             ∂t
   11 A section s of [0, ∞)×Q with the property that s∗ Θ has no dt component is called a temporal

gauge; it exists if Q is trivializable.
                                                  9
In more usual notation this reads

                                                  ∂g
                                 g −1 ξg + g −1      = 0,
                                                  ∂t

which has a unique solution with initial condition g0 = id by the standard theory
of first order ordinary differential equations.
  We apply this lemma to glue connections over manifolds with boundary along
boundaries where the connections agree.
Proposition 1.24. Suppose P → X is a G bundle over an oriented manifold X,
and Y ֒→ X is an oriented codimension one submanifold. Let X cut be the manifold
obtained by cutting X along Y . There is a gluing map ḡ : X cut → X which is
a diffeomorphism off of Y and maps two distinct submanifolds Y1 , Y2 of ∂X cut
diffeomorphically onto Y . Let P cut = ḡ ∗ P be the cut bundle and g : P cut → P the
gluing map. Now suppose Θcut is a connection on P cut such that there exists a
connection η on P Y with g ∗ (η) = Θ Y1 ⊔Y2 . Then η extends to a connection Θ
on X such that g ∗ (Θ) is gauge equivalent to Θcut . The gauge equivalence class of Θ
is uniquely determined.
The hypothesis asserts that Θcut Y1 and Θcut Y2 agree under the given identifica-
tion of the bundles. Just as a smooth function on X cut whose restrictions to Y1
and Y2 agree does not necessarily glue into a smooth function on X, since the
resulting function may not be smooth in the transverse direction, so too the con-
nection Θcut does not glue directly. Proposition 1.24 asserts that we can glue
smoothly if we make a gauge transformation.
Proof. Choose tubular neighborhoods Ni ∼      = [0, ∞) × Yi of Yi in X cut and bundle
                    ∼
isomorphisms P Ni = [0, ∞) × P Yi . Let ϕi be the gauge transformations over Ni
guaranteed by Lemma 1.21. Let ρ1 : [0, 1] → [0, 1] be a monotone increasing smooth
function with ρ1 (t) = t for 0 ≤ t ≤ 0.5 and ρ1 ([0.9, 1]) = 1. Let ρ2 : [0, 1] → [0, 1]
be a monotone increasing smooth function with ρ2 ([0, 0.1]) = 0 and ρ2 ([0.9, 1]) = 1.
Define ϕ̃i by                                 
                                  ϕi ρ1 (t), y ,  0 ≤ t ≤ 1;
                                 
                     ϕ̃i (t, y) = ϕi (2 − ρ2 t), y , 1 ≤ t ≤ 2;
                                 
                                 
                                   id,                 2 ≤ t,
and extend ϕ̃i to a smooth gauge transformation ϕ̃ on X cut which is the identity
outside of Ni . Then ϕ̃∗ (Θcut ) glues to form a smooth connection Θ on X, since
near Yi the transverse component of ϕ̃∗ (Θcut ) vanishes.
   Let h·i : g ⊗ g → R be an Ad-invariant symmetric bilinear form on the Lie
algebra g. Since

(1.25)                           g∼
                                  = t ⊕ k1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ ks

is a direct sum of an abelian Lie algebra t with simple Lie algebras ki , from (1.1)–
(1.3), the invariant form also decomposes as a direct sum. Any invariant form on ki
is a multiple of the Killing form bi , and any symmetric form on t is invariant. Thus
the space of forms on g is S 2 t∗ ⊕ Rb1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ Rbs .
                                           10
   Suppose Θ is a G connection on P → X with curvature Ω. Let hΩ ∧ Ωi be
the Chern-Weil 4-form associated with the bilinear form h·i. It follows from (1.14)
and (1.15) that this form on P is the lift of a 4-form on X, which we also denote hΩ∧
Ωi. Furthermore, a simple computation using (1.16) shows that this form is closed.
The fundamental result of Chern-Weil theory is that the de Rham cohomology
class of this form is a certain characteristic class of P . The form hΩ ∧ Ωi is gauge
invariant by (1.19) and the fact that h·i is Ad-invariant.
   The Chern-Simons form [CS] is an antiderivative of hΩ ∧ Ωi on P . Set
                                             1
(1.26)                   α = α(Θ) = hΘ ∧ Ωi − hΘ ∧ [Θ ∧ Θ]i.
                                             6
Proposition                1.27. The          3-form        α           satisfies:
(a)          i∗x α           =            − 16 hθx   ∧      [θx     ∧       θx ]i;
(b)               dα                 =                   hΩ       ∧           Ωi;
(c)                  Rg∗ α                         =                           α;
(d ) If ϕ : P ′ → P is a bundle map and Θ a connection on P , then α(ϕ∗ Θ) =
ϕ∗ α(Θ).
(e) If ϕ : P → P is a gauge transformation with associated map g = gϕ : P → G,
and φ = φϕ = ϕ∗ (θ), then

                                                 1
(1.28)                ϕ∗ α = α + dhAdg−1 Θ ∧ φi − hφ ∧ [φ ∧ φ]i.
                                                 6

Proof. (a) and (c) follow easily from (1.9), (1.10), (1.14), (1.15), and the Ad-
invariance of h·, ·i. (d) is also trivial. (b) and (e) require some calculation; we
illustrate (b) and leave (e) to the reader:
                                      1
            dα = hdΘ ∧ Ωi − hΘ ∧ dΩi − hdΘ ∧ [Θ ∧ Θ]i
                                      2
                       1                              1
               = h(Ω − [Θ ∧ Θ]) ∧ Ωi + hΘ ∧ [Θ ∧ Ω]i − hΩ ∧ [Θ ∧ Θ]i
                       2                              2
               = hΩ ∧ Ωi.

Here we use

(1.29)               h[Θ ∧ Θ] ∧ [Θ ∧ Θ]i = h[[Θ ∧ Θ] ∧ Θ] ∧ Θi = 0

which follows from Ad-invariance and the Jacobi identity.
   It is useful for us to think about all connections at once. In a technical sense
we shouldn’t think of the set of connections since the set of “all” of anything leads
to contradictions. Also, we want to account for the automorphisms of connections,
since that is our basic symmetry. Thus we consider the category of all connec-
tions and morphisms of connections. As the word ‘category’ is anathema for many
mathematicians and most physicists, but is a useful concept for us, we insert a few
general remarks. The simplest algebraic structure on a set S is a binary associative
composition law S × S → S. Such a structure is termed a monoid .12 The simplest
   12 If there is an identity element as well, S is termed a semigroup. If, in addition, there are

inverses, then S is a group, which is perhaps the most familiar algebraic type. Categories are
usually defined as generalizations of semigroups, but we will not insist on identity elements.
                                               11
example is the set of natural numbers under addition. A category C is nothing more
than a “monoid with states”. Thus there is a collection Obj(C) of objects (states)
and for each pair of objects C1 , C2 there is a set of morphisms Mor(C1 , C2 ). A
                                            ϕ
morphism is represented by an arrow C1 −    → C2 from the initial state to a final
                                 ϕ                    ϕ′
state. Two morphisms C1 −     → C2 and C1′ −→ C2′ compose if and only if C2 = C1′ ,
and the composition law is assumed associative. A monoid is then a category with
a single object. Notice that we don’t assume that Obj(C) is a set, but we do assume
that Mor(C1 , C2 ) is a set for every pair of morphisms.
                                                             G
   Let X be a fixed manifold. Define the category CX = CX       of G connections as
follows. An object in CX is a connection Θ on a principal G bundle P → X. A
               ϕ
morphism Θ′ −  → Θ is a bundle map ϕ : P ′ → P covering the identity map on X (i.e.,
a bundle morphism) such that Θ′ = ϕ∗ Θ. Notice that the category CX contains
                     id
identity maps Θ −→ Θ and that every morphism is invertible. Such a category is
termed a groupoid . The category CX carries a topology.13 The objects form a union
of affine spaces
                                                      G
(1.30)                                Obj(CX ) =           AP ,
                                                       P

where {P } is the collection of all principal G bundles over X. The set of morphisms
between two connections is also a topological space in a natural way.
   There is an obvious equivalence relation on CX —two connections Θ, Θ′ are equiv-
                                                  ϕ
alent if and only if there exists a morphism Θ −  → Θ′ . We denote the set of equiva-
lence classes by CX . Let {Pi } be a set of representatives of topological equivalence
classes of G bundles over X. Then there is a noncanonical isomorphism
                                             G             
                                     CX ∼
                                        =            APi       GPi
                                             {Pi }


as a disjoint union.
   Heuristically, a groupoid is a “group with states”. In gauge theory this notion
provides an illuminating formalism in which to keep track of the symmetry. If
all G bundles over X are isomorphic (which occurs if G is connected and simply
connected and dim X ≤ 3, for example), then we might fix P → X and consider
the space of fields to be AP with the group of gauge transformations GP acting
as symmetries. This is the usual picture. Or more generally we might fix a set of
representatives for the different topological types. However, this is not adequate.
Consider a situation in which we have two isomorphic bundles P → X and P ′ → X ′
we wish to identify, as when we glue connections. The glued connection, perhaps
even its equivalence class, depends on the particular identification we choose. As
there is no canonical identification, we need to keep track of all possible identi-
fications. This is an additional symmetry and justifies our consideration of the
category of bundles rather than simply a set of representatives.
   A functor F : C1 → C2 generalizes the notion of a homomorphism of monoids.
                                                                                 ϕ
Namely, F is a map Obj(C1 ) → Obj(C2 ), and F assigns to each morphism C1 −     →
    13 Here we ignore whatever technical complications might arise from the fact that the collection

of all principal bundles is not a set. I hope that readers who are capable of identifying these
difficulties are also capable of coping with them.
                                                12
                        F (ϕ)
C2 a morphism F (C1 ) −−−→ F(C2 ) such that composition is preserved. (If the
categories have identity maps, then these must also be preserved.) Let h : G ֒→ G′
be an inclusion of groups. Then our previous remarks about extensions of structure
group are summarized by the statement that h induces a functor
                                                 ′
                                       G     G
(1.31)                          hX : C X −→ CX

for any manifold X.




                                        13
                             §2 The Chern-Simons Action
    In this section we integrate the Chern-Simons lagrangian (1.26) over spacetime
(a compact, oriented 3-manifold) to construct the Chern-Simons action. Since the
Chern-Simons form lives on the total space of a bundle, and not on the base, we
choose a section of the bundle to define the action.14 On closed 3-manifolds the
integral is independent of the section, up to an integer, if we make the appropriate
integrality hypothesis on the bilinear form (Hypothesis 2.5). If the 3-manifold
has a boundary, then the integral depends only on the restriction of the section
over the boundary, and the dependence is encoded in a cocycle (2.15). The Wess-
Zumino-Witten action (2.13) enters in the formula for this cocycle; we develop
its properties in Appendix A. The cocycle determines a hermitian complex line
which only depends on the restriction of the connection to the boundary. We
term this line the “Chern-Simons line”. These lines vary smoothly, so form a line
bundle over smooth families of connections (Proposition 2.17). This line bundle
and cocycle were also considered in [RSW] In Theorem 2.19 we state carefully the
properties of the Chern-Simons action. This can be viewed as an axiomatization
of a local (topological) classical Lagrangian field theory, in the spirit of Segal’s
axioms for conformal field theory [S] and Atiyah’s axioms for topological quantum
field theory [A]. The crucial gluing law, which is an assertion of the locality of the
action, is (2.27).
    From now on we fix a connected, simply connected, compact Lie group G and
an invariant form h·i on its Lie algebra g. We single out simply connected groups
because of the following topological fact.
Lemma 2.1. If G is simply connected, then any principal G bundle over a manifold
of dimension ≤ 3 admits a global section, hence is trivializable.
The proof uses π0 G = π1 G = π2 G = 0 and elementary obstruction theory. Suppose
Θ is a connection on a principal G bundle P → X, where X is a closed, oriented
3-manifold. Let p : X → P be a section. Recall the Chern-Simons form α = α(Θ) ∈
Ω3P (1.26). Define
                                                Z
(2.2)                             SX (p, Θ) =           p∗ α(Θ).
                                                    X


Proposition 2.3. Let ϕ : P → P be a gauge transformation with associated map
gϕ : P → G. Set g = gϕ p : X → G and let φg = g ∗ θ be the pullback of the Maurer-
Cartan form. Then
                                                             Z
                                                                   1
(2.4)       SX (ϕp, Θ) = SX (p, ϕ∗ Θ) = SX (p, Θ) −                  hφg ∧ [φg ∧ φg ]i.
                                                                 X 6



Proof. The first equality is immediate from (2.2). The second equality follows
from (1.28) and Stokes’ theorem.
We now make the following integrality hypothesis on the bilinear form h·i.

   14 In this paper we restrict ourselves to trivializable bundles (cf. Lemma 2.1). The extension

to nontrivializable bundles is carried out in Part 2 [F2].
                                               14
Hypothesis 2.5. Assume that the closed form − 61 hθ∧[θ∧θ]i represents an integral
class in H 3 (G; R).
Then the integral in (2.4) is an integer. Since any two sections of P are related by
a gauge transformation, it follows that

(2.6)                         SX (Θ) = SX (p, Θ) (mod 1)

is independent of the section p. This is the Chern-Simons action on closed mani-
folds.
    We can also deduce the independence of (2.6) on the section from the fact that the
Chern-Simons form is closed (cf. Proposition 1.27(b)). Thus (2.2) doesn’t change
under homotopies of p. Then the integrality of the restriction of the cohomology
class of the Chern-Simons form to the fiber gives the rest.
Proposition 2.7. Let X be a closed oriented 3-manifold. The Chern-Simons ac-
tion
                             SX : CX −→ R/Z
is                    smooth 15                   and                   satisfies:
(a) (Functoriality) If ϕ : P ′ → P is any bundle map covering an orientation pre-
serving diffeomorphism ϕ̄ : X ′ → X, and Θ is a connection on P , then

                                     SX ′ (ϕ∗ Θ) = SX (Θ).

(b) (Orientation) Let −X denote X with the opposite orientation. Then

                                     S−X (Θ) = −SX (Θ).

(c) (Additivity) If X = X1 ⊔X2 is a disjoint union, and Θi are connections over Xi ,
then
                      SX1 ⊔X2 (Θ1 ⊔ Θ2 ) = SX1 (Θ1 ) + SX2 (Θ2 ).
It follows from (a) that there is an induced action

                                       SX : CX −→ R/Z

defined on the fields modulo symmetries. We will often write the action as e2πiSX (Θ) ,
in which case (c) appears as a multiplicative property.
Proof. The smoothness follows since α(Θ) is a smooth function of Θ (1.26). For (a),
let p′ : X ′ → P ′ be a section and p = ϕp′ ϕ̄−1 the induced section of P . Then by
Proposition 1.27(d)
                      Z                       Z
                            −1 ∗ ′ ∗ ∗             ∗
          SX (p, Θ) =    (ϕ̄ ) p ϕ α(Θ) =        p′ α(ϕ∗ Θ) = SX ′ (p′ , ϕ∗ Θ).
                         X                           X′

Assertions (b) and (c) follow from standard properties of integration of differential
forms on oriented manifolds.
   15 We will not bother with technicalities regarding the smooth structure of infinite dimensional

manifolds here; they are well-understood. Rather, we will usually verify smoothness for a family
of connections parametrized by a smooth manifold U , which the reader can take to be finite
dimensional.
                                                15
   The Chern-Simons action of a connection which extends over a 4-manifold can
be computed by integrating the Chern-Weil form. Let Θ̃ be a connection on a
principal G bundle P̃ → W over a compact oriented 4-manifold W , and denote the
curvature of Θ̃ by Ω̃. Then the action of the restriction ∂ Θ̃ to the boundary is
                                         Z
(2.8)                     S∂W (∂ Θ̃) =         hΩ̃ ∧ Ω̃i (mod 1).
                                           W


This follows from Proposition 1.27(b) and Stokes’ theorem.
   The Chern-Simons functional also behaves well under extension of structure
group.

Proposition 2.9. Let k : G ֒→ G′ be an inclusion of connected, simply connected,
compact Lie groups, and X a closed oriented 3-manifold. Suppose h·i′ is an integral
form on g′ which restricts to h·i on g. Then for any G connection Θ over X, its
extension Θ′ to a G′ connection satisfies SX (Θ′ ) = SX (Θ).

In fancier language, Proposition 2.9 asserts that the diagram

                                               h
                               CX (G1 ) −−−X−→ CX (G′1 )
                                                 
                                  
                               SX y
                                                  S
                                                  y X
                                  R/Z                   R/Z

commutes, where hX is the functor which extends G connections to G′ connec-
tions (1.31).

Proof. Let P → X be the G bundle carrying Θ and P ′ → X its G′ extension.
There is an inclusion hP : P ֒→ P ′ . Recall from (1.17) that h∗P Θ′ = ḣ(Θ). Since
ḣ∗ (h·i′ ) = h·i it follows from (1.26) that h∗P α(Θ′ ) = α(Θ). Fix a section p : X → P ;
then hP ◦ p is a section of P ′ . Now
                                  Z                     Z
             SX (hP ◦ p, Θ′ ) =       p∗ h∗P α(Θ′ ) =       p∗ α(Θ) = SX (p, Θ).
                                  X                     X



  Next, we consider compact oriented 3-manifolds X with nonempty boundary.
Suppose Θ is a G connection on P → X. We retain the definition (2.2). But now
Proposition 2.3 is replaced by

Proposition 2.10. Let ϕ : P → P be a gauge transformation with associated map
gϕ : P → G. Set g = gϕ p : X → G and let φg = g ∗ θ be the pullback of the Maurer-
Cartan form. Then
(2.11)                                 Z                       Z
                     ∗                             ∗               1
SX (ϕp, Θ) = SX (p, ϕ Θ) = SX (p, Θ) +     hAdg−1 p Θ ∧ φg i −       hφg ∧ [φg ∧ φg ]i.
                                        ∂X                       X 6


It is no longer true that the last two terms in (2.11) vanish modulo integers, but
rather
                                               16
Lemma 2.12. With Hypothesis 2.5 the functional
                         Z
                               1
(2.13)        W∂X (g) =     − hφg ∧ [φg ∧ φg ]i (mod 1)
                          X    6
depends only on the restriction of g : X → G to ∂X.
W∂X (g) is called the Wess-Zumino-Witten functional ; it is the action of a 1+1 di-
mensional field theory. In Appendix A we sketch the development of this theory.
Proof. If g ′ : X ′ → G and there is an orientation reversing diffeomorphism ∂X ∼=
∂X ′ under which the restrictions of g and g ′ coincide, then these maps patch to-
gether into a closed oriented (singular) 3-chain g̃ : X ′ − X → G. Then
                                        Z
                                                1
(2.14)           W∂X (g ′ ) − W∂X (g) =       − hφg ∧ [φg ∧ φg ]i ∈ Z
                                          ′
                                         X −X   6

is an integer by Hypothesis 2.5.
Therefore, the Chern-Simons action (2.2) depends in a controlled manner on the
restriction of p to ∂X. We make sense of this by defining a metrized complex
line L∂Θ attached to the restriction ∂Θ of Θ to ∂X. The Chern-Simons invariant
of Θ takes values in L∂Θ . (Compare with the discussion at the beginning of this
section.) Notice that we are only concerned with the elements in L∂Θ of unit norm,
which form a principal homogeneous space for the circle group T. It is easy to
go back and forth between the T-space and the metrized line, which we do freely
(usually without changing the notation).
   We remark that we could also treat this dependence on boundary values by
examining homotopies of sections and using the fact that the Chern-Simons form
is closed; we leave this approach to the reader.
   First, we abstract the construction of vector spaces (in this case lines) in situa-
tions where one must make a choice (here the choice of a section on the boundary).
We suppose that the set of possible choices and isomorphisms of these choices form
a groupoid C. Let L be the category whose objects are metrized complex lines
and whose morphisms are unitary isomorphisms.16 Suppose we have a functor
F : C → L. Define VF to be the inner product space of invariant sections of the
functor F : An element v ∈ VF is a collection {v(C) ∈ F(C)}C∈Obj(C) such that
        ψ
if C1 −→ C2 is a morphism, then F (ψ)v(C1 ) = v(C2 ). Suppose C is connected ,
that is, there exists a morphism between any two objects. Then dim VF = 0 or
dim VF = 1, the latter occurring if and only if F has no holonomy, i.e., F (ψ) = id
                                 ψ
for every automorphism C −  → C. The terminology comes from the example of a
metrized line bundle L → M with unitary connection over a manifold M . Form
a category C(M ) whose objects are the points of M and whose morphisms are
piecewise smooth unparametrized paths in M . The category C(M ) is connected if
and only if M is connected. The functor F assigns the fiber Lm to m and parallel
transport to paths. The inner product space VF is then the space of flat sections.
The functor has no holonomy if and only if the connection has no holonomy.
   16 Alternatively we can think of L as the category whose objects are principal homogeneous T-

spaces, where T is the circle group. The elements of unit norm in a metrized line form a principal
homogeneous T-space. The tensor product of complex lines is then a product on the category of
T-spaces.
                                               17
   Fix a G connection η on Q → Y , where Y is an oriented closed 2-manifold. By
Lemma 2.1 the bundle Q is trivializable. Let CQ be the category whose objects
are sections q : Y → Q. For any two sections q, q ′ there is a unique morphism
   ψ
q−→ q ′ , where ψ : Q → Q is the gauge transformation such that q ′ = ψq. Define
the functor Fη : CQ → L by Fη (q) = C for all q, where C has its standard metric,
           ψ
and Fη (q − → q ′ ) is multiplication by cY (q ∗ η, gψ q), where gψ : Q → G is the map
associated to ψ, and cY is the cocycle y
(2.15)                  Z
                                                       
   cY (a, g) = exp 2πi hAdg−1 a ∧ φg i + WY (g) ,            a ∈ Ω1Y (g), g : Y → G.
                        Y

That Fη is a functor follows from the cocycle identity

(2.16)                      cY (a, g1 g2 ) = cY (a, g1 )cY (ag1 , g2 ),

where
                                     ag = Adg−1 a + φg .
We leave the verification of (2.16) to the reader, who may wish to consult (A.10)
and (A.8). Since CQ is connected and Fη has no holonomy (there are no nontrivial
automorphisms), we obtain the desired metrized line Lη = LY,η of invariant sec-
tions. From the construction we see that a section q : Y → Q induces a trivialization
Lη ∼= C.
   It is important to observe that these “Chern-Simons lines” vary smoothly in
smooth families of connections.
Proposition 2.17. Suppose ηu is a smooth family of connections on Q → Y for
u varying over a smooth manifold U . Then the lines Lηu form a smooth hermitian
line bundle over U .
The line bundle is trivialized by a section q : Y → Q. Transition functions between
different trivializations are smooth since the map

                                    u 7−→ cY (q ∗ ηu , gψ q)

is smooth, as formula (2.15) clearly shows. Notice that the elements of unit norm
form a circle bundle over U .
   Return now to the connection Θ over the 3-manifold X. Equation (2.11) shows
that
                                ∂p 7−→ e2πiSX (p,Θ)
defines an invariant section of unit norm

(2.18)                                e2πiSX (Θ) ∈ L∂Θ ,

where ∂Θ is the restriction of Θ to ∂X and ∂p is the restriction of the section p
to ∂X. This is the Chern-Simons invariant for manifolds with boundary. In good
Bourbaki style we allow either X or ∂X to be the empty set ∅ in (2.18): Set L∅ = C
and S∅ ≡ 0. The following theorem generalizes Proposition 2.7 and expresses what
we mean by the statement “SX is the action of a local Lagrangian field theory”.
                                                18
Theorem 2.19. Let G be a connected, simply connected compact Lie group and
h·i : g ⊗ g → R an invariant form on its Lie algebra g which satisfies the integrality
condition Hypothesis 2.5. Then the assignments

                            η 7−→ Lη ,               η ∈ CY ,
(2.20)
                            Θ 7−→ e2πiSX (Θ) ,       Θ ∈ CX ,

defined above for closed oriented 2-manifolds Y and compact oriented 3-manifolds X
are                      smooth                     and                    satisfy:
(a) (Functoriality) If ψ : Q′ → Q is a bundle map covering an orientation pre-
serving diffeomorphism ψ : Y ′ → Y , and η is a connection on Q, then there is an
induced isometry

(2.21)                             ψ ∗ : Lη −→ Lψ∗ η

and these compose properly. If ϕ : P ′ → P is a bundle map covering an orientation
preserving diffeomorphism ϕ̄ : X ′ → X, and Θ is a connection on P , then
                                                     ∗
(2.22)                   (∂ϕ)∗ e2πiSX (Θ) = e2πiSX ′ (ϕ Θ) ,

where ∂ϕ : ∂P ′     →      ∂P is the induced                map    over     the   boundary.
(b) (Orientation) There is a natural isometry

(2.23)                               L−Y,η ∼
                                           = LY,η ,

and

(2.24)                         e2πiS−X (Θ) = e2πiSX (Θ) .

(c) (Additivity) If Y = Y1 ⊔ Y2 is a disjoint union, and ηi are connections over Yi ,
then there is a natural isometry

(2.25)                           Lη1 ⊔η2 ∼
                                         = Lη1 ⊗ Lη2 .

If X = X1 ⊔ X2 is a disjoint union, and Θi are connections over Xi , then

(2.26)            e2πiSX1 ⊔X2 (Θ1 ⊔Θ2 ) = e2πiSX1 (Θ1 ) ⊗ e2πiSX2 (Θ2 ) .

(d ) (Gluing) Suppose Y ֒→ X is a closed, oriented submanifold and X cut is the
manifold obtained by cutting X along Y . Then ∂X cut = ∂X ⊔ Y ⊔ −Y . Suppose
Θ is a connection over X, with Θcut the induced connection over X cut , and η the
restriction of Θ to Y . Then
                                                      cut
                                                           
(2.27)                   e2πiSX (Θ) = Trη e2πiSX cut (Θ ) ,

where Trη is the contraction

                      Trη : L∂Θcut ∼
                                   = L∂Θ ⊗ Lη ⊗ Lη −→ L∂Θ
                                            19
using the hermitian metric on Lη .
   Several comments are in order. From a functorial point of view: (a) implies that
η 7→ Lη defines a functor

(2.28)                                  CY → L

and that each X determines an invariant section e2πiSX (·) of the composite functor
CX → C∂X → L, where the first arrow is restriction to the boundary. From down
here on earth: To each bundle Q → Y over a closed, oriented 2-manifold there is
associated a smooth line bundle LQ → AQ over the space of connections, and the
action of gauge transformations GQ on AQ lifts to LQ . Furthermore, a bundle P →
X over a compact, oriented 3-manifold determines a restriction map AP → A∂P and
so an induced line bundle LP → AP ; the action of gauge transformations GP on AP
lifts to LP . Then e2πiSX (·) is an invariant section of LP . These line bundles and
sections are smooth, by Proposition 2.17. Although (c) looks like a multiplicative
property, it expresses the additivity of the classical action SX . However, SX is
not defined if ∂X 6= ∅, which is why we use the exponential notation e2πiSX (·) .
Theorem 2.19 expresses in a (necessarily) complicated way the fact that SX is a
local functional of local fields defined as the integral of a local expression (c), (d);
is invariant under symmetries of the fields (a); and is unitary (b).
Proof. The smoothness of η 7→ Lη is Proposition 2.17. Suppose Θu is a smooth fam-
ily of connections parametrized by a smooth manifold U . Fix a section p : X → P ;
its restriction to ∂X determines a smooth trivialization of the lines L∂Θu . Relative
to this trivialization e2πiSX (Θu ) is the function e2πiSX (p,Θu ) , which is smooth in u
since u 7→ α(Θu ) is smooth. For (a), fix a section q ′ : Y ′ → Q′ and so an isometry
       = C. The induced section q = ψq ′ ψ̄ −1 : Y → Q induces an isometry Lη ∼
Lψ ∗ η ∼                                                                            = C.
Relative to these trivializations we define ψ ∗ : Lη → Lψ∗ η to be the identity map
C → C. A routine check shows that this definition is independent of the choice
of section q ′ .17 Equation (2.22) is proved similarly using a trivialization of P ′ .
For (2.23) we observe that the cocycle (2.15) changes sign when the orientation
of Y is reversed. Similarly, the integral in (2.2) changes sign if the orientation of X
is reversed, from which (2.24) follows (after fixing a trivialization). The statements
in (c) follow from the fact that the integral
                                            R   overR a disjoint union is the sum of the
integrals, and in (d) from the fact that X cut = X . We leave details to the reader.
   Proposition 2.9 extends to manifolds with boundary.
Proposition 2.29. Let k : G ֒→ G′ be an inclusion of connected, simply connected,
compact Lie groups. Suppose h·i′ is an integral form on g′ which restricts to h·i
on g. Then if η is a G connection over a closed, oriented 2-manifold Y , and η ′ its
G′ extension, there is a natural isometry

(2.30)                              kη : Lη −→ Lη′ .

If Θ is a G connection over a compact, oriented 3-manifold X, and Θ′ its G′ ex-
tension, then                                    ′
                         k∂Θ e2πiSX (Θ) = e2πiSX (Θ ) .

   17 For this we need the functoriality of the Wess-Zumino-Witten action, which is proved

by (2.14).
                                           20
In categorical terms, k induces a natural transformation from the functor CYG → L
                    k      ′
to the functor CYG −−→
                     Y
                         CYG −→ L (cf. (2.28), (1.31)). For each X this induces a
                                G       G              G      G′      G′
natural transformation from CX     → C∂X      → L to CX   → CX   → C∂X   → L which
preserves the invariant sections e2πiSX (·) . Though the language is complicated, the
proof is straightforward, and we omit it.




                                         21
            §3 Classical Solutions and the Hamiltonian Theory
   The classical solutions in a Lagrangian field theory are the critical points of the
action, which are computed by a standard calculus of variations argument. In the
Chern-Simons theory these are the flat connections (up to equivalence). A standard
result in differential geometry (Proposition 3.5) shows that this space is determined
by the fundamental group. The Hamiltonian theory pertains to spacetimes which
are globally products of a space (here a closed, oriented 2-manifold) with time
(the positive reals, say). In the Chern-Simons theory the classical solutions are
constant in time, i.e., the hamiltonian function vanishes (Proposition 3.16). So
the space of classical solutions is the moduli space of flat connections on a bundle
over a 2-manifold, which has been the object of much study recently. The Chern-
Simons lines defined in §2 descend to form a hermitian line bundle over this moduli
space. Furthermore, the Chern-Simons action defines a connection on this circle
bundle whose curvature is a symplectic form (Proposition 3.17). This is the phase
space of the Hamiltonian theory. We also prove some simple facts about the action
of the stabilizer of a connection on the Chern-Simons line (Proposition 3.25 and
Proposition 3.26).
   Our first order of business is to calculate the differential of the action SX on a
closed oriented 3-manifold. Recall that the configuration space of fields is a disjoint
union of affine spaces (1.30).
                                                                 d
Proposition 3.1. Let Θt be a path in CX . Denote Θ = Θ0 and Θ̇ = dt t=0
                                                                        Θt .
Then
                                          Z
                       d
(3.2)                         SX (Θt ) = 2 hΩ ∧ Θ̇i,
                       dt t=0              X

where Ω is the curvature of Θ.
The reader should check that the integrand, which is ostensibly a 3-form on P , is
the lift of a 3-form on X.
Proof. The connections Θs form a single connection Θ on each cylinder [0, t] × X
with curvature Ωs + ds ∧ Θ̇s , where Ωs is the curvature of Θs . Then (2.8) implies
that for each t,
                                          Z t Z
(3.3)                S(Θt ) − S(Θ0 ) = 2     dt hΩs ∧ Θ̇s i.
                                                  0    X

The proposition follows by differentiating (3.3) at t = 0.
  It follows that dSX (Θ) = 0 if and only if Ω = 0, i.e., if and only if Θ is flat.
Notice that the Euler-Lagrange equation

(3.4)                                      Ω=0

is first order.18 Since the action is invariant under symmetries, by Proposition 2.7(a),
so is the space of solutions to the Euler-Lagrange equation. In this case that fact
is also obvious directly. Let
                                         MX ⊂ CX
   18 A typical field theory has an action of the form S
                                                                        R
                                                           X (f )   =       X
                                                                                |df |2 , and then the Euler-
Lagrange equation is second order.
                                             22
be the space of equivalence classes of solutions to (3.4).
   Since (3.4) is a local condition and is defined in any dimension, the space MX of
equivalence classes of flat connections is defined for any manifold X. Nevertheless,
we derive these spaces directly from the Chern-Simons action for certain 2- and
3-manifolds, as this is the procedure which generalizes to arbitrary field theories.
First, we note some general facts about flat connections, which in the context of
Chern-Simons theory reflect the topological nature of the action.
Proposition 3.5. Let X be any smooth manifold. Choose a basepoint xi in each
component of X. Then the holonomy provides a natural identification
                                 Y                       
(3.6)                    MX =          Hom π1 (X, xi ), G /G
                                   i


which is independent of the basepoints.
                                   
Here G acts on Hom π1 (X, xi ), G /G by conjugation. We omit the proof, which is
standard
   The space MX is typically not a manifold. If Y is a compact oriented 2-manifold,
then MY is a stratified space whose stratum of top dimension is a smooth mani-
fold [G]. Suppose Θ is a flat connection on P → X (in any dimension), and consider
the covariant derivative dΘ in the adjoint representation. It defines a complex

                                          d
(3.7)                      → Ω0X (gP ) −→
                          0−            Θ
                                          Ω1X (gp ) −
                                                    → ···
                                                                               
since d2Θ = 0. We denote the cohomology groups of this complex by H • X; g(Θ) .
If Θ represents a smooth point of MX , then the tangent space at that point is
                                                  
(3.8)                         T Θ MX ∼
                                     = H 1 X; g(Θ) .

  If Y is a compact oriented 2-manifold, then for a flat connection η there is a
nondegenerate pairing
                                                   
                         H 0 Y ; g(η) ⊗ H 2 Y ; g(η) −→ R.
                                     
The zeroth cohomology H 0 Y ; g(η) is the Lie algebra of the centralizer Zη of η
in the group of gauge transformations. For example, it vanishes if η is irreducible,
since then Zη is isomorphic to the center of G, which is finite. In any case the index
theorem gives
                                     
(3.9)       dim MY = dim H 1 Y ; g(η) = − dim G · χ(Y ) + 2 dim Zη .

Of course, this is a formula for the dimension of the moduli space only at smooth
points η; at other points this is a formal dimension. At smooth points η the right
hand side gives a formula for dim MY . Note in particular that MY has even
dimension. This is explained by the theorem of Narasimhan and Seshadri [NS],
which identifies MY as a complex manifold (of stable bundles) when Y is endowed
with a complex structure.
   The following lemma also reflects the topological nature of flat connections.
                                           23
Lemma 3.10. Suppose Θ is a flat connection on P → X, for some manifold X,
and ϕi : P ′ → P, i = 0, 1 are bundle maps. Then if ϕ̄0 : X ′ → X is (pseudo)isotopic
to ϕ̄1 : X ′ → X, the connections ϕ∗0 Θ and ϕ∗1 Θ are gauge equivalent.
Proof. This follows directly from Proposition 3.5, since ϕ̄0 and ϕ̄1 induce the same
map on π1 . Alternatively, let ϕ : [0, 1] × P ′ → [0, 1] × P be a bundle map covering
a pseudoisotopy ϕ̄ : [0, 1] × X ′ → [0, 1] × X. Then by Lemma 1.21 there is a unique
gauge transformation ϕ̃ : [0, 1] × P ′ → [0, 1] × P ′ such that ϕ̃0 = id and ϕ̃∗ ϕ∗ Θ = ηt
has no dt component, where t is the coordinate on [0, 1]. The curvature of ϕ̃∗ ϕ∗ Θ
is

(3.11)                                   Ωt − η̇t ∧ dt,

where Ωt is the curvature of ηt . But (3.11) vanishes, since Θ is flat. Hence η̇t = 0,
from which η0 = η1 . In other words ϕ∗0 Θ = η0 = η1 = ϕ̃∗1 (ϕ∗1 Θ), which proves the
lemma.
   Now consider a compact oriented 3-manifold X, possibly with nonempty bound-
ary. For η ∈ C∂X we define

                               CX (η) = { Θ ∈ CX : ∂Θ = η }

as the category of fields with boundary value η. Morphisms in CX (η) are required
to be the identity over ∂X.
Proposition 3.12. Let Θt be a path in CX (η). Then
                                                      Z
                               d
                                      SX (Θt ) = 2         hΩ ∧ Θ̇i.
                               dt t=0                  X


We omit the derivation, which is similar to the derivation of (3.2), except for two
points: (i) the cylinder [0, t] × X needs to be smoothed at the corners; and (ii) the
action on [0, t] × ∂X is zero since the connection is constant there. The critical
points form the moduli space of flat connections MX (η) ⊂ CX (η) which restrict
to η on the boundary. This space is nonempty only if η is flat.
   We next form the union MX of the MX (η).19 For this we need to divide out the
                                             ψ
symmetries on the boundary. Let η ′ −  → η be a morphism in C∂X . We claim that
there is an induced functor CX (η ′ ) → CX (η) which maps MX (η ′ ) isomorphically
onto MX (η). For suppose Θ is a connection on P → X with ∂Θ = η. Choose
a bundle P ′ → X and a morphism ϕ : P ′ → P such that ∂ϕ = ψ. Then the
induced functor maps the equivalence class of ϕ∗ Θ (in CX (η ′ )) to the equivalence
class of Θ. A routine check shows that this is independent of the choice of ϕ.
The functor is defined in a similar manner on morphisms in CX (η ′ ). Therefore,
there is a functor η 7→ MX (η) from C∂X to the category of (singular) manifolds.
Then MX is the space of invariant sections of this functor. We repeat that MX is
simply the moduli space of flat connections on X, so is given by (3.6); its topology
    19 Of course, M
                   X is simply the moduli space of flat connections on X. The algebraic exercise
in this paragraph is our understanding of the role that symmetries play in the classical theory on
manifolds with boundary. Similar considerations also enter in the quantum theory.
                                                 24
and manifold structure should be understood from that point of view. Finally, the
restriction to ∂X gives a diagram

                                      MX −−−−→ CX
                                               
(3.13)                                         
                                       y        y
                                      M∂X −−−−→ C∂X
If η is a flat connection over ∂X, then the fiber of (3.13) over the equivalence class
of η in M∂X is isomorphic to MX (η).
   If Y is a closed oriented 2-manifold, then MY ⊂ CY is the moduli space of flat
connections. Again we wish to “derive” this space from the Chern-Simons action.
Thus we consider the Hamiltonian formulation of the theory, i.e., study the action
on the cylinder X = [0, ∞) × Y . This “spacetime” X is the product of “space” Y
and “time” [0, ∞). In the Hamiltonian formulation we rewrite the space of fields
as a space of paths.
Proposition 3.14. Let {Q} be a set of representatives for the equivalence classes
of G bundles over Y . Then there is an identification
                                 G                    
(3.15)                C[0,∞)×Y =     Map [0, ∞), AQ      GQ .
                                        {Q}


Proof. If Θ ∈ C[0,∞)×Y is a connection on P → [0, ∞) × Y , then ∂P ∼        = Q for
a unique Q ∈ {Q}. Since [0, ∞) is contractible there is an isomorphism P ∼        =
[0, ∞) × Q, and by Lemma 1.21 we can choose an isomorphism which takes Θ to a
path ηt of connections on Q. As this is unique up to an overall gauge transformation
on Q, the assertion follows.
   The classical solutions on [0, ∞) × Y are completely determined by their initial
value.20
Proposition 3.16. The restriction to the boundary M[0,∞)×Y ⊂ C[0,∞)×Y →
C{0}×Y is an isomorphism of M[0,∞)×Y onto the moduli space MY of flat con-
nections over Y .
Proof. Suppose Θ is a flat connection over [0, ∞)×Y . After a gauge transformation
this is a path ηt in CY . But the proof of Lemma 3.10 shows that ηt is constant.
Thus η0 determines the gauge equivalence class of Θ.
   One fundamental idea in the Hamiltonian formulation of classical mechanics, is
that the fields over a cylinder are paths in a symplectic manifold .21 Furthermore,
the space of classical solutions also carries a symplectic structure. For Chern-Simons
theory the identification (3.15) indicates that the purported symplectic structure
on each AQ is GQ invariant. These assertions form the next proposition. Recall
that the lines Lη attached to η ∈ CY vary smoothly with η. So for each Q they
form a smooth hermitian line bundle LQ → AQ .
    20 Contrast with the usual case of a second order Euler-Lagrange equation, where both an

initial value and an initial derivative must be specified.
    21 Many physicists who subscribe to the “symplectic philosophy” emphasize that in a local field

theory the symplectic structure is derived from the lagrangian. That is our approach. (See [GS]
for a survey of symplectic geometry in physics.)
                                                25
Proposition 3.17. Fix a G bundle Q → Y over a closed oriented 2-manifold.
Then the Chern-Simons action defines a unitary connection on the hermitian line
bundle LQ → AQ . The curvature of this connection times i/2π is
                                  Z
(3.18)          ω(η̇1 , η̇2 ) = −2 hη̇1 ∧ η̇2 i, η̇1 , η̇2 ∈ T AQ .
                                         Y

If h·i is nondegenerate, then ω is a symplectic form. The action of GQ on AQ
lifts to LQ , and the lifted action preserves the metric and connection. The induced
moment map is
                                           Z
(3.19)                           µξ (η) = 2 hΩ(η) ∧ ξi,
                                                Y

where ξ ∈ Ω0Y (gQ ) is an infinitesimal gauge transformation. Over subsets of AQ
where GQ acts freely, then (a subset of ) the moduli space MQ of flat connections is
the symplectic quotient AQ //GQ . There is an induced line bundle LQ → MQ with
metric and connection, and i/2π times its curvature is the induced symplectic form
on MQ .
That a nondegeneracy hypothesis on the lagrangian is necessary to obtain a non-
degenerate symplectic structure is standard in classical mechanics [Ar]. The sym-
plectic structure of AQ is well-known [AB], and the symplectic form on MQ can be
defined using cohomology [G]. Here, though, we see both structures arising directly
from the Chern-Simons action in 3 dimensions.
Proof. Let ηt be a smooth path in AQ . Then ηt determines a connection η on
[0, 1] × Q → [0, 1] × Y . Now ∂(η) = η1 ⊔ η0 is a connection on Q ⊔ Q → Y ⊔ −Y .
Then L∂(η) ∼ = Lη0 ⊗ Lη1 by the properties in Theorem 2.19. Using the metric
on Lη0 , we identify Lη0 ⊗ Lη1 as the line of linear maps Lη0 → Lη1 . Let

(3.20)                     PT(ηt ) = e2πiS[0,1]×Y (η) : Lη0 −→ Lη1

be the Chern-Simons action of η. Note that PT(ηt ) is unitary, since the corre-
sponding element of Lη0 ⊗ Lη1 has unit norm. We claim that PT(ηt ) is the parallel
transport of a connection on LQ → AQ .
   Fix a section q : Y → Q. Then from the construction of lines in §2 (see (2.15))
this induces a (unitary) trivialization sq : AQ → LQ . Consider the connection η
over [0, 1] × Y . Using the formula (3.11) for its curvature, we see that the Chern-
Simons form is
                             q ∗ α(η) = −q ∗ hηt ∧ η̇t i ∧ dt.
Hence from (2.2) the action relative to the section q is
                                         Z 1 Z
(3.21)               S[0,1]×Y (q, η) = −     dt   q ∗ hηt ∧ η̇t i.
                                                 0       Y

This motivates us to introduce the (connection) 1-form θq on AQ defined by22
                                             Z
(3.22)                     (θq )η (η̇) = 2πi   q ∗ hη ∧ η̇i.
                                                     Y

    22 Notice that parallel transport is the integral of minus the connection form relative to some

trivialization.
                                                26
We must check that this transforms properly under gauge transformations. If
ψ : Q → Q is a gauge transformation, then

                                   sψq (η) = cY (q ∗ η, gψ q)−1 sq (η)

according to (2.15). On the other hand, we easily compute from (1.18) that

(3.23)                        Z
         (θψq )η (η̇) = 2πi        q ∗ hψ ∗ η ∧ ψ ∗ η̇i
                              ZY                                    Z
                    = 2πi     q ∗ hAdg−1 η ∧ Adg−1 η̇i + 2πi                 q ∗ hφg ∧ Adg−1 η̇i
                                      ψ         ψ                                 ψ       ψ
                            Y                                            Y
                                    Z
                    = (θq )η − 2πi hAdg−1 (q ∗ η̇) ∧ φg i,
                                           Y

where g = gψ q. But from (2.15) we see that the logarithmic differential of the
cocycle with respect to η,
                                             Z
                  dcY (q ∗ η, gψ q)(η̇)
                                        = 2πi hAdg−1 (q ∗ η̇) ∧ φg i,
                     cY (q ∗ η, gψ q)         Y

is minus the last term in (3.23). It follows that the set of forms {θq }, where
q ranges over trivializations of Q → Y , defines a unitary connection on LQ → AQ .
Furthermore, as the logarithm of the parallel transport is the integral of minus the
connection form, we see from (3.21) that the Chern-Simons action (3.20) is the
parallel transport of this connection. The curvature times i/2π is
                                                             Z
                                    i
                   ω(η̇1 , η̇2 ) =    (dθq )(η̇1 , η̇2 ) = −2 hη̇1 ∧ η̇2 i.
                                   2π                         Y

If h·i is nondegenerate, then so is ω. Since the curvature of a line bundle is also
closed, it follows that ω is a symplectic form.
   Now (2.21) is a lift of the GQ action on AQ to LQ . Furthermore, (2.22) shows
that this lift preserves the parallel transport (3.20), hence the connection. (It
also preserves the metric, so acts on the associated circle bundle with connection.)
It follows that the GQ action on AQ preserves the curvature ω, so is symplectic.
We compute a moment map for this action using the lift to LQ .23 In general, if
L → M is a hermitian line bundle (or circle bundle) over a symplectic manifold,
and ρ : G → Aut(L) is a G action on L preserving the metric and connection, then
the moment map of the quotient G action on M is

                                                i              
(3.24)                    µξ (m) = −              · vert ρ̇(ξ)ℓ ,   ξ ∈ g,
                                               2π
where ℓ ∈ Lm is a point of unit norm, ρ̇(ξ) is the vector field on L corresponding
to ξ ∈ g, and vert(·) is the vertical part of a vector computed with respect to
the connection on L. Notice that it is exactly the obstruction to descending the
    23 For a general symplectic group action there may be many moment maps, if one exists at

all. Here the lift of the action to LQ , which is ultimately derived directly from the Chern-Simons
action, singles one out.
                                                          27
connection form to the quotient L/G. We compute this in our situation using the
trivialization sq : AQ → LQ given by a section q : Y → Q. Set a = q ∗ η. Then a
gauge transformation ψ : Q → Q corresponds to a map g = gψ q : Y → G. It acts
as multiplication by e2πicY (a,g) from the (trivialized) fiber at η to the fiber at ψ ∗ η.
An infinitesimal gauge transformation corresponds to a map ξ : Y → g, and it acts
as multiplication by the derivative, which we compute from (2.15) to be
                                        Z
                                     2πi ha ∧ dξi.
                                             Y

On the other hand, the connection form in this trivialization is (3.22), and us-
ing this we compute the infinitesimal parallel transport in the direction ξ to be
multiplication by                   Z
                                     −2πi        ha ∧ da ξi,
                                             Y
where da ξ = dξ + [a ∧ ξ] is the covariant derivative. The difference times −i/2π is
                      Z                          Z
                         ha ∧ (2dξ + [a ∧ ξ]) = 2 hΩ(η) ∧ ξi,
                          Y                               Y

where Ω(η) is the curvature of η. Hence by (3.24) the moment map is (3.19),
as desired. Since the flat connections are the zeros of µ, the space of equivalence
classes MQ of flat connections is the symplectic quotient AQ //GQ , if GQ acts freely.
The line bundle, together with its metric and connection, pass to a bundle LQ →
MQ on the quotient. The symplectic form (3.18) also passes to the quotient. Its
de Rham cohomology class is an integral24 element of H 2 (MQ ; R), since it is the
first Chern class of LQ .
   The connection can also be deduced from the gluing law and diffeomorphism
invariance of the action. We give this argument in the proof of Proposition 5.9,
where we also calculate the curvature and holonomy directly from the action. The
simplest case of the Chern-Weil theorem asserts that i/2π times the curvature of
a line bundle represents the first Chern class in real cohomology. This applies here
to LQ over the symplectic quotient. We refine this in Part 2 to calculate the first
Chern class in integral cohomology.
   We remark that this connection is consistent with the isomorphism (2.30) asso-
ciated to a change of gauge group; this follows from Proposition 2.9.
   In general GQ does not act freely on AQ ; the stabilizer at η ∈ AQ is the sub-
group Zη of parallel gauge transformations (cf. Proposition 1.20). The value of
such a gauge transformation at y ∈ Y , which lies in Aut(Qy ), commutes with the
holonomy group at y. There is an action of Zη on the line Lη .
Proposition 3.25. The action of Zη on Lη is constant on components of Zη , and
so factors through an action of the finite group π0 (Zη ) on Lη .
Proof. If ψ ∈ Zη then we form the bundle Qψ → S 1 × Y with connection ηψ by
gluing the ends of [0, 1] × Q using ψ. According to (3.20) the action of ψ on Lη
is e2πiSS1 ×Y (ηψ ) . But if ψ and ψ ′ are connected by a path in Zη , then ηψ ∼
                                                                               = ηψ ′ .
   Along these lines we also have the following.
   24 Thus the symplectic form satisfies the integrality constraint in the geometric quantization

theory.
                                                 28
Proposition 3.26. The center Z ⊂ G acts trivially on Lη for all η ∈ AQ .
Combining these two propositions we see that the action of Zη on Lη factors through
an action of π0 (Zη /Z).
Proof. Suppose g ∈ Z, which we identify as a constant function on Y . Let q : Y → Q
be any section and a = q ∗ η. Then the action of g on Lη is multiplication by the
cocycle cY (a, g) in (2.15), which is easily seen to be the identity.
  Next, let X be an arbitrary compact oriented 3-manifold with boundary, and
consider the diagram (3.13).
Proposition 3.27. The image of rX : MX → M∂X is a Lagrangian submanifold.
                                                                         ∗
More precisely, the action e2πiSX (·) is a flat section of the pullback rX L∂X → M∂X ,
                                                ∗
and therefore the induced symplectic form rX ω vanishes.
Just as the symplectic form ω satisfies an integrality condition—it is i/2π times
the curvature of a line bundle—so too does the Lagrangian submanifold MX →
M∂X satisfy an “integrality condition”—the pullback line bundle with connection
is trivial. (This gives a restriction on the holonomy, for example.) We use the term
“Lagrangian submanifold” imprecisely. Rather, we should assert that MX → M∂X
is “a Lagrangian map”. Jeffrey and Weitsman also obtain this result [JW]; they
use the term “Bohr-Sommerfeld orbits” for these special Lagrangian submanifolds.
Proof. If S 1 → MX is a loop of flat connections Θt , there is a corresponding
                                                           ∗
connection Θ over S 1 × X. Now the log holonomy of rX        L∂X around S 1 is the
action SS 1 ×∂X (Θ), by (3.20). The curvature of Θ is (3.11)

(3.28)                               Ω = −Θ̇t ∧ dt.
Hence from (2.8),                          Z
                          SS 1 ×∂X (Θ) =            hΩ ∧ Ωi = 0.
                                           S 1 ×X
      ∗
So rX   L∂X is flat. The more precise statement that e2πiSX (·) is a flat section is
slightly more intricate. Suppose Θt is a path of flat connections on X, and consider
the induced connection on [0, 1] × X. The action of its restriction to [0, 1] × ∂X de-
termines the parallel transport (3.20), whereas the restriction to {t} × X is SX (Θt ).
The curvature is still given by (3.28), so that hΩ ∧ Ωi ≡ 0. Then equation (2.8)
applied to [0, 1] × X implies that e2πiSX (Θ1 ) is obtained from e2πiSX (Θ0 ) by parallel
transport. This proves that the section is flat.
    It remains to show that 2 dim(image rX ) = dim M∂X . Suppose Θ is a flat
connection on X representing a smooth point of MX and whose restriction ∂Θ
to ∂X represents a smooth point of M∂X . Then according to (3.8) we must show
                                                                                
   2 dim image (rX )∗ : H 1 X; g(Θ) → dim H 1 ∂X; g(Θ) = dim H 1 ∂X; g(Θ) .
In fact, the image of (rX )∗ is a Lagrangian subspace. When Θ is trivial the argument
is standard. Consider the commutative diagram
                                (rX )∗
                    H 1 (X)    −−−−→ H 1 (∂X) −−−−→ H 2 (X, ∂X)
                                                       
                       ∼                ∼              ∼
                       y=                y=              y=
                                                       i
                  H2 (X, ∂X) −−−−→ H1 (∂X) −−−−→              H1 (X)
                                           29
where the coefficients are in a vector space. The rows are exact and the vertical
isomorphisms are Poincaré duality. By exactness we have image (rX )∗ ∼   = ker i.
Also, i and (rX )∗ are adjoint maps, from which image (rX )∗ ∼   = (ker i)◦ is the
annihilator of ker i. It follows that image (rX )∗ is Lagrangian, as claimed. The
same argument works if Θ is nontrivial, provided we prove that the complex (3.7)
on ∂X defined by d∂Θ also satisfies Poincaré duality. This is shown in [G] using
group cohomology. There is also a proof in de Rham theory modeled after [BT,§5].
   In summary, the Hamiltonian theory consists of the assignments

                                    Y 7−→ MY
                                                X     r
                                    X 7−→ (MX −−→ M∂X )

of a symplectic manifold to each closed oriented 2-manifold and a Lagrangian map
to each compact oriented 3-manifold. These assignments obey functoriality, ori-
entation, additivity, and gluing laws analogous to those in Theorem 2.19. More
precisely, one should consider instead the hermitian line bundle with connection
                                                  ∗
LY → MY and the section e2πiSX (·) : MX → rX        L∂X . Then there is little differ-
ence between the Hamiltonian theory and the Lagrangian theory.25 We leave the
precise formulation of these assertions to the reader (cf. [Ax,§3]).




    25 This somewhat startling conclusion is only valid for topological theories. In theories with lo-

cal motion there is a nonzero hamiltonian function which must be incorporated into the formalism.
                                                 30
                              §4 Surfaces with boundary
   In the quantum Chern-Simons theory [W] a key role is played by surfaces with
boundary. Ultimately, explicit computations depend on their use. In this section we
develop the classical analogue of this structure. Based on Theorem 2.19 we might
guess that there exists a metrized line Lη depending smoothly on a connection η over
a surface with boundary, and that these lines satisfy a gluing law which constructs
the line of a closed surface by cutting and pasting. However, there is a topological
obstruction which obstructs such a construction.26 This will be elucidated in Part 2
of the paper [F2].27 Here we add some “trivializing data” on the boundary of
the surface which allows us to construct the desired lines; these lines then obey
a gluing law. There is also a gluing law for the Chern-Simons action where we
cut along manifolds with corners (Proposition 4.11). The corresponding quantum
gluing law [S], [Wal] is quite powerful. In the middle of this section we include a
long digression about the geometry of connections over the circle. This is essentially
a universal choice of trivializing data for each isomorphism class of bundle over the
circle. Then we construct a smooth line bundle over the space of connections
(and basepoints) on the surface with boundary, provided we suitably restrict the
boundary holonomies (Theorem 4.26). As in §2 these line bundles descend to
various moduli spaces of flat connections. One of these, by a theorem of Mehta and
Seshadri [MeS], can be identified with the moduli space of stable parabolic bundles
when the surface carries a complex structure. We compute the dimension of these
moduli spaces (4.43), (4.44) even at reducible connections. The index calculation in
Lemma 4.40, Corollary 4.41, and Proposition 4.42 may be of independent interest.
In §5 we construct connections on the line bundles over these moduli spaces.
   We begin by mimicking the construction of Lη in Theorem 2.19. To make sense of
the Wess-Zumino-Witten term on a surface with boundary we rely on the discussion
in Appendix A. In particular, we use the lines Kγ which make up a central extension
of the loop group.
   Suppose Y is a compact oriented 2-manifold and Q → Y a principal G bundle.
Let S∂Q be the space of sections r : ∂Y → ∂Q of ∂Q → ∂Y . It is a principal
homogeneous space for the action of the group of gauge transformations G∂Q . Then
for each connection η ∈ AQ we construct a metrized line Lη,r which varies smoothly
in η and r. To do this define the cocycle
(4.1)               Z
                                      
cY (a, g) = exp 2πi hAdg−1 a ∧ φg i e2πiWY (g) ∈ K∂g ,       a ∈ Ω1Y (g), g : Y → G
                        Y

as in (2.15). Notice that this cocycle takes values in the Wess-Zumino-Witten
line K∂g (cf. Proposition A.1), where ∂g : ∂Y → G is the restriction of g to the
boundary. The cocycle identity

(4.2)                        cY (a, g1 g2 ) = cY (a, g1 ) cY (ag1 , g2 )
   26 I thank George Daskalopoulos and Sheldon Chang for (separately) pointing this out to me.
    27 The analogy with Theorem 2.19 is illuminating. For a closed 3-manifold the Chern-Simons

invariant is a complex number, whereas for a 3-manifold with boundary it is an element in a
complex line. Now for a closed 2-manifold the Chern-Simons functional constructs a complex
line, whereas for a 2-manifold with boundary it constructs a . . . The differential-geometric object
which replaces the dots in the previous sentence together with its generalizations form the subject
of [F1].
                                                 31
holds for these cocycles, as the reader may verify. (Equation (A.7) enters this
calculation.) Let CQ be the category whose objects are sections q : Y → Q. We do
not require that these sections restrict to r on the boundary; rather the quotient
by r is a map r−1 ∂q : ∂Y → G. In other words, ∂q = r·(r−1 ∂q), where · is the action
of G on the principal bundle Q. Now for any two sections q, q ′ there is a unique
               ψ
morphism q −  → q ′ which is the gauge transformation ψ : Q → Q with q ′ = ψq.
Define a functor Fη,r : CQ → L by

(4.3)                                 Fη (q) = Kr−1 ∂q

            ψ
and Fη (q − → q ′ ) equals multiplication by cY (q ∗ η, q −1 q ′ ). Here q −1 q ′ : Y → G is the
unique function so that q ′ = q · (q −1 q ′ ). The multiplication is via the isomorphism
(cf. (A.2))
                           Kr−1 ∂q ⊗ K(∂q)−1 (∂q′ ) −→ Kr−1 ∂q′ .
That Fη is a functor follows from the cocycle identity (4.2) and the associativity
law (A.3). Define Lη,r to be the line of invariant sections of Fη .
Proposition 4.4. Let G be a connected, simply connected compact Lie group and
h·i an invariant form on its Lie algebra g which satisfies the integrality condition
Hypothesis 2.5. Suppose Y is a compact oriented 2-manifold and Q → Y a principal
G bundle. Then the assignment

                         η, r 7−→ Lη,r ,        η ∈ AQ ,     r ∈ S∂Q ,

of a metrized line to a connection η on a G bundle Q → Y and section r : ∂Y → ∂Q
is smooth, agrees with the corresponding assignment (2.20) if ∂Y = ∅, and satisfies:
(a) (Functoriality) If ψ : Q′ → Q is a bundle map covering an orientation preserving
diffeomorphism ψ : Y ′ → Y , then there is an induced isometry

(4.5)                             ψ ∗ : Lη,r −→ Lψ∗ η,ψ−1 r

and                   these                   compose                                properly.
(b) (Orientation) There is a natural isometry

(4.6)                                L−Y ;η,r ∼
                                              = LY ;η,r .

(c) (Additivity) If Y = Y1 ⊔ Y2 is a disjoint union, ηi are connections over Yi , and
ri are sections over ∂Yi , then there is a natural isometry

(4.7)                         Lη1 ⊔η2 ,r1 ⊔r2 ∼
                                              = Lη1 ,r1 ⊗ Lη2 ,r2 .

(d ) (Gluing) Suppose S ֒→ Y is a closed oriented codimension one submanifold
and Y cut the manifold obtained by cutting along S. Then ∂Y cut = ∂Y ⊔ S ⊔ −S.
Furthermore, if Q → Y is a bundle, and Qcut → Y cut the cut bundle, then there
is an identification of Qcut S and Qcut −S . Fix trivializations rS , r−S over these
boundary pieces which agree under this identification. Suppose η is a connection
on Q and η cut the induced connection on Qcut. Then for any trivialization r∂Y
of ∂Q there is an isometry

(4.8)                           Lηcut ,r∂Y ⊔rS ⊔r−S ∼
                                                    = Lη,r∂Y .
                                               32
(e) (Change of Trivialization) If r′ is another trivialization over ∂Y , then there is
an isometry

(4.9)                             Lη,r′ ∼
                                        = Kr′−1 r ⊗ Lη,r .

These compose in a natural way for three trivializations r, r′ , r′′ .
Proof. For smoothness note that a section q : Y → Q induces an isomorphism
Lη,r ∼ = Kr−1 ∂q , and the lines Kr−1 ∂q vary smoothly in r by Proposition A.1. Now
if q ′ is any other section then the patching function is cY (q ∗ η, q −1 q ′ ), which is
independent of r and varies smoothly in η by the explicit formula (4.1). Also, note
that if ∂Y = ∅ then the construction given here for Lη,r reduces to the construction
of lines in §2.
   Next, if ψ : Q′ → Q is the bundle map in (a), fix a section q : Y → Q. This
induces the section ψ −1 q : Y → Q′ . Notice that (ψ −1 r)−1 ∂(ψ −1 q) = r−1 ∂q, since
ψ −1 is a gauge transformation. Then relative to the resulting isomorphisms Lη,r ∼     =
Kr−1 ∂q and Lψ∗ η,ψ−1 r ∼  = K(ψ−1 r)−1 ∂(ψ−1 q) = Kr−1 ∂q we define (4.5) to be the
identity map. It is easy to check that this is independent of the choice of q.
   Equations (4.6) and (4.7) are routine. For (4.8) fix a section q : Y → Q, which
induces isomorphisms
              Lηcut ,r∂Y ⊔rS ⊔r−S ∼
                                  = K(r∂Y )−1 ∂q ⊗ K(rS )−1 ∂q ⊗ K(r−S )−1 ∂q
(4.10)
                          Lη,r ∼
                             ∂Y   = K(r )−1 ∂q .
                                        ∂Y


(In the first equation ‘∂q’ stands for the restriction of q to the appropriate piece of
the boundary.) Now the orientation and additivity properties in Proposition A.1
give a trivialization of K(rS )−1 ∂q ⊗K(r−S )−1 ∂q . Then the isometries in (4.10) combine
to give the isometry (4.8). It is easy to check that this is independent of the
section q : Y → Q using the gluing law for the Wess-Zumino-Witten functional
(Proposition A.9). Finally, relative to a section q : Y → Q the isometry (4.9)
becomes the isometry
                               Kr′−1 ∂q ∼
                                        = Kr′−1 r ⊗ Kr−1 ∂q
of (A.2), which again transforms properly under change of trivializing section.
   The following gluing law for the Chern-Simons action generalizes Theorem 2.19(d)
to “manifolds with corners”. Such manifolds can be smoothed out uniquely up to
diffeomorphism by “straightening the angle” [CF].
Proposition 4.11. Let X be a compact oriented 3-manifold and Y a compact
oriented 2-manifold with boundary. Suppose Y ֒→ X is an embedding onto a neat
submanifold of X; that is, Y ∩∂X = ∂Y and Y is transverse to ∂X. Let X cut be the
manifold with corners obtained by cutting X along Y . Then ∂X cut = ∂X ∪ Y ∪ −Y
where the union is over ∂Y ⊔ −∂Y . Suppose Θ is a connection over X. Let Θcut be
the induced connection over X cut, let η be the restriction of Θ to Y , and let (∂Θ)cut
be ∂Θ cut along ∂Y ֒→ ∂X. Then for any trivialization r over ∂Y , we have
                                                       cut
                                                            
                         e2πiSX (Θ) = Trη e2πiSX cut (Θ ) ,

where Trη is the contraction

            Trη : L∂Θcut ∼
                         = L(∂Θ)cut ,r ⊗ Lη,r ⊗ Lη,r −→ L(∂Θ)cut ,r ∼
                                                                    = L∂Θ
                                             33
using the hermitian metric on Lη,r and the isomorphism (4.8).
We omit the proof, which contains no new ideas.
   Let AQ be the space of all connections on a fixed bundle Q → Y , let GQ be the
space of gauge transformations, and let SQ be the space of sections. Assume that
∂Y 6= ∅. Then the group GQ × Map(∂Y, G) acts on AQ × SQ via the action
(4.12)
hψ, γi·hη, ri = hψ ∗ η, ψ −1 r·γi, ψ ∈ GQ , γ ∈ Map(∂Y, G), η ∈ AQ , r ∈ SQ .

Proposition 4.4 asserts that the lines Lη,r form a smooth line bundle L → AQ × SQ ,
                                                                               \ G)
but the action (4.12) only lifts to an action of the central extension GQ × Map(∂Y,
defined in (A.5). So we do not obtain a line bundle over the quotient AQ /GQ . From
this point of view the central extension is the obstruction to the existence of that line
bundle. In fact, there are topological obstructions to the existence of a line bundle
over AQ /GQ which obeys the desired gluing law. So we must content ourselves
with a bundle over a subset of this quotient. Furthermore, we introduce additional
choices on the boundary to construct the line bundle.
   We first digress to discuss connections over the circle. Without extra effort we
consider connections for arbitrary compact Lie groups G. Let S 1 = [0, 1] 0 ∼ 1 be
the standard circle with basepoint 0 ∈ S 1 . We consider principal bundles R → S 1
with a fixed basepoint in R over the basepoint in S 1 . There is a category CS′ 1 of
connections on pointed bundles; morphisms are required to preserve the basepoints.
Then there are no nontrivial automorphisms of a connection in this category, since
any automorphism which fixes the basepoint is the identity, according to Proposi-
tion 1.20. It follows that if θ1 ∼= θ2 are isomorphic connections, there is a unique
(pointed) isomorphism between them. It is precisely to obtain this rigidity prop-
erty that we introduce basepoints. Now the basepoint determines a holonomy
map CS′ 1 → G. Since isomorphic connections have the same holonomy, there is
an induced map on the equivalence classes CS′ 1 → G. It is an easy consequence
of Lemma 1.21 that this latter map is 1 : 1; that is, a connection with basepoint
over S 1 is determined up to isomorphism by its holonomy. There is a universal
bundle and connection. Define
                                      
(4.13)              R=G×R×G               hh, s, gi ∼ hh, s + 1, h−1 gi.

This is a G bundle R → G × S 1 via projection onto the first two factors. Better,
it is a family of pointed G bundles Rh → S 1 over S 1 parametrized by h ∈ G;
the basepoint in Rh is {hh, 0, ei}, where e ∈ G is the identity. The Maurer-Cartan
form θ on G, lifted to {h}×R×G, drops to a connection θRh on Rh with holonomy h.
There exist connections θR on R which restricts to θRh on each slice Rh ; we
construct one explicitly below (4.14). Summarizing, if θ is any (pointed) connection
over S 1 , then there is a unique isomorphism θ ∼= θRh for some h.
   We now explicitly construct the connection θR . Let θ be the Maurer-Cartan form
on G, lifted to G × (−0.1, 1.1) × G via projection onto the third factor, and θh the
Maurer-Cartan form lifted via projection onto the first factor. Fix a smooth
                                                                             cutoff
function ρ : (−0.1, 1.1) → [0, 1] so that ρ (−0.1, 0.1] = 0 and ρ [0.9, 1.1) = 1. Set

                        (θR )hh,s,gi = θ + ρ(s) Adg−1 h θh
(4.14)
                                   = g −1 dg + ρ(s)g −1 dhh−1 g,
                                             34
where the second expression makes sense for matrix groups. Then an easy calcula-
tion with the gluing function in (4.13) shows that (4.14) determines a connection
form on R. The restriction to a slice Rh is θRh . From (1.13) we compute the
curvature 2-form on G × S 1 :
                                                  1             
(4.15)         ΩR = ρ′ (s)ds ∧ Adg−1 h θh +         ρ(s)2 − ρ(s) Adg−1 h [θh ∧ θh ].
                                                  2
For an integral form h·i on the Lie algebra g, we compute the Chern-Weil 4-form
on G × S 1 as
                                              
              hΩR ∧ ΩR i = ρ′ (s) ρ(s)2 − ρ(s) ds ∧ hθh ∧ [θh ∧ θh ]i,

in view of (1.29). Finally, note that
               Z                 Z 1
                                                            
                    hΩR ∧ ΩR i =      ds ρ′ (s) ρ(s)2 − ρ(s) ∧ hθh ∧ [θh ∧ θh ]i
                  1
(4.16)          S                  0
                                    1
                               = − hθh ∧ [θh ∧ θh ]i.
                                    6
By Hypothesis 2.5 this 3-form on G represents an integral cohomology class in H 3 (G; R).
Proposition 4.17. The bundle R → G × S 1 is nontrivial if G ∼   6= 1.
Proof. According to (1.25) the Lie algebra g decomposes as a sum of an abelian alge-
bra and simple algebras. If there is a simple summand, then we choose h·i : g⊗g → R
to be its Killing form. It follows from (4.16) that hΩR ∧ ΩR i represents a nonzero
cohomology class in H 4 (G × S 1 ). By Chern-Weil theory this is a characteristic
class of R → G × S 1 , and so the bundle is nontrivial. If g is abelian, then a similar
argument can be made using a 2-form hΩR i built from a trace h·i : g → R on g. If
G is a finite group, then the slice Rh → S 1 is nontrivial if h 6= 1.
   We also record the following lemma about holonomy. Let R → S be a principal
G bundle over an oriented, connected 1-manifold. Though S is diffeomorphic to a
circle, we do not need a fixed parametrization. Fix a basepoint s ∈ S. Then the
space of connections and basepoints in the fiber is AR × Rs , and the holonomy is
a smooth map
                               hol : AR × Rs −→ G.
Lemma                                                                                4.18.
(i) hol is a submersion, i.e., d holhη,bi is surjective for all η ∈ AR ,           b ∈ Rs .
(ii) If ḃ ∈ Tb (Rs ) ∼
                      = g, and hol(η, b) = h, then

(4.19)                    h−1 d holhη,bi (0, ḃ) = (1 − Adh−1 )(ḃ).

(iii) Let gR be the adjoint bundle of R, and suppose ζ ∈ Ω0S (gR ). With respect to
the basepoint b ∈ Rs we identify ζ(s) as an element of g. Then if hol(η, b) = h,
                                                                 
(4.20)              h−1 d holhη,bi (dη ζ, 0) = (1 − Adh−1 ) −ζ(s) .

(iv ) Suppose hol(η, b) = h and ζ ∈ Ω0S (gR ) with dη ζ = 0. Then
                                                             Z
(4.21)                h ζ(s) ⊗ h−1 d holhη,bi (η̇ , ḃ) i = − hζ ∧ η̇i.
                                                             S
                                             35
Of course, (i) implies that hol−1 (h) is a manifold for each h ∈ G. In (iii) note that
the covariant derivative is a map

                                                   dη
(4.22)                                   Ω0S (gR ) −→ Ω1S (gR ).

The domain Ω0S (gR ) is the Lie algebra of the group of gauge transformations GR ,
the codomain Ω1S (gR ) is the tangent space to the affine space AR of connections,
and dη is the infinitesimal action of gauge transformations on connections. Here
dη is Fredholm; its kernel is the space of covariant constant sections, which can be
identified with the invariants of Adh by evaluation at the basepoint. Assertions (i)
and (iii) imply that h−1 d holhη,ri induces an isomorphism of the cokernel of (4.22)
with the coinvariants of Adh , i.e., an isomorphism coker dη ∼
                                                             = coker(1 − Adh ).
Proof. Cut the circle S at the basepoint s to obtain an interval S cut and a bundle
Rcut → S cut . Then a connection on R determines and is determined by a (horizon-
tal) section of Rcut . Since the fibers over the endpoints of S cut are identified, we
can compare the section at these two endpoints by an element of G; this is the ho-
lonomy. Relative to a local trivialization near the terminal endpoint, (i) translates
to the obvious statement that evaluation at the endpoint is a submersion from the
space of paths in a connected manifold A to A. Notice that we can fix the basepoint,
which is the value of the section at the initial endpoint, for this argument.
   For (ii) suppose bt is a curve of basepoints with tangent ḃ. Write bt = bgt for a
curve gt ∈ G. Then the holonomy of η with respect to bt is gt−1 hgt . Differentiate
to deduce (4.19).
   For (iii) let ϕt be a curve in GR with tangent ζ. Then ϕ∗t η is a path of connections
with tangent dη ζ. But
                                hol(ϕ∗t η, b) = hol(η, ϕ−1
                                                        t b),

and the tangent to the path ϕt−1 (b) is −ζ(s). So (iii) follows from (ii).
  To prove (iv) we first note that (4.19) implies
                                                                             
h ζ(s)⊗h−1 d holhη,bi (0, ḃ) i = h ζ(s)⊗(1−Adh−1 )(ḃ) i = h (1−Adh−1 ) ζ(s) ⊗ ḃ i = 0.

In the last step we use the fact that ζ is parallel, so commutes with the holonomy.
Hence we may set ḃ = 0. Let ηt be a path of connections on R with initial velocity η̇,
and bt a path in Rs with initial velocity ḃ. We cut at the basepoint s ∈ S to obtain
a path of connections on Rcut → S cut . Let r be a flat section of Rcut relative to η
with initial value b, and define gt : S cut → G so that rgt is a flat section of Rcut
relative to ηt with initial value b. Then from (1.18) and the fact that (rgt )∗ ηt = 0
we deduce r∗ η̇ = −dr∗ η ġ. Therefore, by Stokes’ theorem we have
         Z                 Z                            Z
(4.23)        hζ ∧ η̇i =           hr∗ ζ ∧ r∗ η̇i = −           hr∗ ζ ∧ dr∗ η ġi = −hr∗ ζ ⊗ ġi ∂S cut .
          S                S cut                        S cut


At the initial point of S cut we have ġ = 0, whereas at the terminal point ġ =
h−1 d holη,b (η̇ , ḃ). Thus (4.23) implies (4.21).
  Return now to the case of a connected and simply connected group G. Since the
bundle R → G × S 1 is not trivial, we cannot continuously trivialize the bundles
                                                   36
Rh → S 1 simultaneously for all h ∈ G. Hence restrict to a subset V ⊂ G where
this is possible, and thus choose a smooth trivialization

(4.24)                             r : V × S 1 → R,

i.e., a smooth family of trivializations rh : S 1 → Rh . Our constructions in the next
paragraphs and in §5 depend on the trivializations rh through (4.9).
    To use these standard trivializations on 2-manifolds we must identify boundary
components with the standard circle. Let Y be a compact oriented 2-manifold, and
fix a diffeomorphism S 1 → (∂Y )i for each component of ∂Y . We do not require
that these boundary parametrizations preserve orientation, and so we distinguish
‘+’ boundary components and ‘−’ boundary components according to whether the
parametrization preserves or reverses the orientation. The images of the basepoint
in S 1 give a basepoint on each component of ∂Y . We consider connections η on bun-
dles Q → Y together with basepoints bi ∈ Q (∂Y )i over the basepoints on the (∂Y )i .
We denote the collection of basepoints as b = hb1 , . . . , bk i. Bundle morphisms are
required to preserve the basepoints. These connections on bundles with basepoints
together with these morphisms form a category CY′ of pointed connections.
    Now suppose hη, bi ∈ CY′ is a pointed connection on Q → Y . Then the restriction
of η to any boundary component (∂Y )i is isomorphic to a standard connection θRhi ,
where hi ∈ G is the holonomy of η around (∂Y )i , computed with respect to the
basepoint. Hence there is a unique pointed isomorphism Q (∂Y ) ∼           = Rhi which
                                                                         i
pulls θRhi back to the restriction of η. Assume that all of the boundary holonomies
fall within the distinguished subset V ⊂ G. Then the trivializations rhi chosen
above induce a trivialization r(η, b) : ∂Y → ∂Q of Q over the boundary. Now let

(4.25)                             Lη,b = Lη,r(η,b)

be the line defined above relative to this distinguished trivialization.
Theorem 4.26. Let G be a connected, simply connected compact Lie group and
h·i an invariant bilinear form on its Lie algebra g which satisfies the integrality
Hypothesis 2.5. Fix a subset V ⊂ G over which we choose a smooth trivializa-
tion (4.24). Suppose Y is a compact oriented 2-manifold with parametrized bound-
ary. Let CY′ (V ) denote the subset of pointed connections whose boundary holonomies
all lie in V . Then the assignment

(4.27)                   hη, bi −→ Lη,b ,        hη, bi ∈ CY′ (V ),

of a metrized line to such pointed connections is smooth and agrees with the corre-
sponding assignment (2.20) if ∂Y = ∅. It satisfies the functoriality property (2.21)
for bundle maps which preserve the basepoints and the boundary parametrizations.
Furthermore, it satisfies the orientation property (2.23) and the additivity prop-
erty         (2.25).                            Finally,          it        satisfies:
(d ) (Gluing) Suppose S ֒→ Y is a closed, oriented codimension one submanifold
and Y cut the manifold obtained by cutting along S. Then ∂Y cut = ∂Y ⊔ S ⊔ −S
and we use parametrizations which agree on S and −S. Suppose hη, bi is a pointed
connection over Y and hη cut , bcut i the induced pointed connection over Y cut . (We
choose basepoints which agree over S and −S to form bcut from b.) Then there is
a natural isometry
                                   Lη,b ∼= Lηcut ,bcut .
                                            37
Proof. For smoothness, it suffices to remark that the holonomy is a smooth func-
tion of a connection. For the functoriality suppose ψ : Q′ → Q is a bundle map
preserving the basepoints and the boundary parametrizations. Let R′ , R be the
restrictions of Q′ , Q to some boundary components which correspond under ψ,
and let ψh : R → Rh be the unique pointed map with ψh∗ (θRh ) = η R . Then
ψh ψ : R′ → Rh satisfies (ψh ψ)∗ (θRh ) = ψ ∗ η R′ . Now the functoriality follows
from (4.5). The other properties follow directly from the corresponding properties
in Proposition 4.4.
   Fix a bundle Q → Y together with parametrizations of the components of ∂Y =
⊔ki=1 (∂Y )i . Let yi be the basepoint of (∂Y )i . The holonomy is a map

(4.28)                holQ : AQ × Qy1 × · · · × Qyk −→ G × · · · × G.

Here Qyi is the fiber of Q over yi , the space of basepoints at yi . Let

                                AQ;V,...,V = hol−1
                                                Q (V × · · · × V ).

Theorem 4.26 asserts the existence of a smooth line bundle

(4.29)                                  LQ;V,...,V → AQ;V,...,V .

Furthermore, the map (4.28) is invariant under the GQ action, and Theorem 4.26
asserts that this action lifts to the line bundle L. Notice that this GQ action is free,
since we include basepoints.
   There is a larger symmetry group which acts when the boundary holonomies are
fixed. Fix h1 , . . . , hk ∈ V ⊂ G and let
                                                    −1
                                 AQ;h1 ,...,hk = holQ  (h1 , . . . , hk );

by Lemma 4.18(i) this is a smooth manifold. Consider the restriction

(4.30)                               LQ;h1 ,...,hk −→ AQ;h1 ,...,hk

of LQ;V,...,V to this space. Let Zhi ⊂ G be the centralizer of hi . A result of Bott
and Taubes [BTau,Prop. 10.2] asserts that Zhi is connected.28 If hi is a regular
element of G, then Zhi is a maximal torus in G. Let Zhi act on the fiber Qyi via
the right principal bundle action of G. Then the group

(4.31)                         GQ;h1 ,...,hk = GQ × Zh1 × · · · × Zhk

acts on hol−1
           Q (h1 , . . . , hk ) via the formula


(4.32)     hη; b1 , . . . , bk i · hψ; g1 , . . . , gk i = hψ ∗ η; ψ −1 (b1 ) · g1 , . . . , ψ −1 (bk ) · gk i,

where η ∈ AQ , ψ ∈ GQ , bi ∈ Qyi , and gi ∈ Zhi . In general this action is
neither free nor effective. We determine the stabilizer at hη; b1 , . . . , bk i in case Y has
no closed components. Any gauge transformation that preserves η is parallel, by
Proposition 1.20, and its value in Aut(Qy ) at y ∈ Y commutes with the holonomy
   28 This depends on the fact that G is connected and simply connected.

                                                       38
group at y. Let Zη ⊂ GQ be the subgroup of all such ψ. Evaluation at the
basepoint bi gives an embedding Zη ֒→ G, and it is easy to see that the image is
contained in Zhi . This gives an embedding of Zη in GQ;h1 ,...,hk , and the image is
the stabilizer of hη; b1 , . . . , bk i. Notice that the kernel of the action, which is the
intersection of these stabilizers, contains the center Z ⊂ G, which sits in GQ as the
subgroup of global gauge transformations.
   Let Aflat
           Q;h1 ,...,hk denote the space of flat connections in AQ;h1 ,...,hk . This is not
necessarily a manifold, but the subset of irreducible flat connections A∗,flat    Q;h1 ,...,hk
does form a submanifold. In any case the group of gauge transformations GQ acts
freely, if Y has no closed components, and we denote the quotient by
                                                                
(4.33)                          M′Y ;h1 ,...,hk = Aflat
                                                   Q;h1 ,...,hk   GQ .

The prime reminds us of the basepoints. This quotient is independent of the choice
of bundle Q → Y up to canonical diffeomorphism, since all G bundles over Y
are isomorphic (they are all trivial). It is easy to see that up to noncanonical
diffeomorphism this moduli space only depends on the conjugacy classes of the hi .
Thus we can restrict hi to be in a maximal torus of G. If we divide out by the full
symmetry group (4.31), we obtain a smaller moduli space
                                                           
(4.34)                  MY ;h̄1 ,...,h̄k = Aflat
                                            Q;h1 ,...,hk       GQ;h1 ,...,hk .

This moduli space depends only on the conjugacy classes h̄i of the hi . It is the
space of equivalence classes of flat connections on Q whose boundary holonomies
are conjugate to the hi . Notice that no basepoints are needed to describe this
moduli space. There is a map

(4.35)                         M′Y ;h1 ,...,hk −→ MY ;h̄1 ,...,h̄k .

The fiber over a connection η is the set of basepoints with respect to which the
boundary holonomies equal the hi . The group

(4.36)                             Z h = Z h1 × · · · × Z hk

acts on the fiber with kernel Zη . If η is irreducible, then Zη ∼
                                                                = Z is the group of
global gauge transformations, which is isomorphic to the center of G; it is a normal
subgroup of Zh . Thus over the subspace

(4.37)                          M∗Y ;h̄1 ,...,h̄k ⊂ MY ;h̄1 ,...,h̄k

of irreducible connections, (4.35) is a principal bundle with structure group Zh /Z.
   To determine the tangent space to M′Y ;h1 ,...,hk at hη; b1 , . . . , bk i we examine
the differential of the equations which assert that η is flat and that the boundary
holonomies are h1 , . . . , hk . This leads to the complex
(4.38)
                     dη ⊕evb                         dη ⊕h−1 d holhη,bi
    → Ω0Y (gQ ) −−−−→ Ω1Y (gQ ) ⊕ g⊕k −−−−−−−−−−−→ Ω2Y (gQ ) ⊕ g⊕k −
  0 −                                                              → 0.

Here evb is evaluation at the basepoints. The fact that (4.38) is a complex follows
from (4.19) and (4.20). We identify the cohomology of (4.38) with the compactly
                                                39
                                            ◦
supported cohomology of the interior Y with coefficients in gQ , i.e., with the coho-
mology of the complex
                                       dη                dη
(4.39)               → Ω0◦ (gQ )c −→ Ω1◦ (gQ )c −→ Ω2◦ (gQ )c −
                    0−                                        →0
                            Y                Y                    Y
                                                        ◦
of compactly supported differential forms on Y with coefficients in gQ . Let H̃ • =
                                                              ◦       
H̃ • (Y ; η, b) denote the cohomology of (4.38) and Hc• = Hc• Y ; g(η) the cohomology
of (4.39).
Lemma 4.40. The inclusion of (4.39) into (4.38) induces an isomorphism H̃ • ∼      =
Hc• on cohomology.
A more direct approach might be to show that H̃ • is a de Rham model for the
twisted relative cohomology H • Y, ∂Y ; g(η) . The following would be a de Rham
proof of excision in that context.
Proof. A simple check shows that the inclusion commutes with the differentials.
We first show that the induced map on cohomology is injective. At degree 0 there
is nothing to check. For degree 1 suppose η̇ ∈ Ω1◦ (gQ )c is closed and maps to
                                                                  Y
zero in H̃ 1 . Then there exists ζ ∈ Ω0Y (gQ ) such that η̇ = dη ζ and ζb = 0. Since
η̇ = 0 near ∂Y we see that ζ is parallel near ∂Y , and then the condition ζb = 0
implies ζ = 0 near ∂Y . Thus ζ has compact support, and so η̇ vanishes in Hc1 .
For degree 2 suppose τ ∈ Ω2◦ (gQ )c is closed and maps to zero in H̃ 2 . Then there
                                 Y
exists hη̇ , ḃi ∈ Ω1Y (gQ ) ⊕ g⊕k such that dη η̇ = τ and h−1 d holhη,bi (η̇ , ḃ) = 0. Now
(4.19) implies that h−1 d holhη,bi (η̇, 0) is in the image of 1 − Adh−1 , and then the
remarks following Lemma 4.18 imply that ∂ η̇ is in the image of dη on ∂Y . Extending
away from the boundary we construct ζ ∈ Ω0Y (gQ ) such that η̇ = dη ζ near ∂Y . So
τ = dη (η̇ − dη ζ) and η̇ − dη ζ ∈ Ω1◦ (gQ )c , whence τ vanishes in Hc2 .
                                      Y
   It remains to show that the inclusion of (4.39) into (4.38) induces a surjection
on cohomology. The only possible cohomology of (4.38) in degree 0 occurs on
closed components of Y , since a flat section of gQ which vanishes at a basepoint
vanishes identically on the component of Y containing the basepoint. The compact
cohomology and ordinary cohomology agree on closed components, so we are done.
For degree 1 suppose hη̇ , ḃi ∈ Ω1Y (gQ ) ⊕ g⊕k satisfies
                                                      dη η̇ = 0
                                  h−1 d holhη,bi (η̇ , ḃ) = 0.

As above we can find ζ ∈ Ω0Y (gQ ) so that η̇ = dη ζ near ∂Y . We can alter any
choice of ζ by a parallel section near the boundary, and in this way we arrange that
ζb = ḃ. Then hη̇ − dη ζ, 0i is cohomologous to hη̇ , ḃi, and η̇ − dη ζ ∈ Ω1◦ (gQ )c has
                                                                            Y
compact support. This completes the proof for degree 1. There is nothing to prove
in degree 2.
  Since the compact cohomology and the ordinary cohomology are in (Poincaré)
duality, we deduce the following.
Corollary 4.41. If Y has no closed components, then
                                H̃ 0 (Y ; η, b) = 0
                                                                
                          dim H̃ 2 (Y ; η, b) = dim H 0 Y ; g(η) .
                                                 40
                       
Note that H 0 Y ; g(η) is the Lie algebra of Zη , the subgroup of gauge transforma-
tions which fix η.
   Lemma 4.40 implies that the index of (4.38) is the index of (4.39), which by
Poincaré duality is the Euler characteristic of Y with coefficients in gQ . (Since
(4.38) differs from the twisted de Rham complex by a finite dimensional operator
of index 0, this also follows directly.)
Proposition 4.42. The index of (4.38) is
         dim H̃ 0 (Y ; η, b) − dim H̃ 1 (Y ; η, b) + dim H̃ 2 (Y ; η, b) = dim G · χ(Y ).

Proof. 29 By the de Rham theorem this twisted Euler characteristic can be com-
puted using other models of cohomology, e.g. cellular theory. It suffices to consider
the case where Y is connected. Fix a basepoint y ∈ Y and a trivialization of the
fiber of gQ at y. Choose a finite CW structure on Y , and let C̃• (Y ) be the cellular
chain complex of the universal cover of Y ; it is a finite dimensional module over
the group algebra R[π1 (Y, y)]. Since the flat connection η determines a represen-
                                                                                
tation of π1 (Y, y) on g, we can form a cochain complex Homπ1 (Y,y) C̃• (Y ), g . Its
cohomology is the cohomology of Y with coefficients in gQ (twisted by the flat
connection η). By counting dimensions we see that its Euler characteristic, which
equals the Euler characteristic of its cohomology, is dim G · χ(Y ).
  Combining Proposition 4.42 with Corollary 4.41 we obtain a formula for the
dimension of the moduli space M′Y ;h1 ,...,hk (4.33) at a smooth point, assuming that
Y has no closed components:
(4.43)         dim M′Y ;h1 ,...,hk = dim H̃ 1 (Y ; η, b) = − dim G · χ(Y ) + dim Zη .
From the discussion following (4.35) we see that the dimension of MY ;h̄1 ,...,h̄k (4.34)
is
                                                 X
        dim MY ;h̄1 ,...,h̄k = − dim G · χ(Y ) −   dim Zhi + 2 dim Zη
                                                        i
(4.44)                                                 X
                              = − dim G · χ(Y ) +               (dim G − dim Zhi ) + 2 dim Zη
                                                            i

at the connection η. Here Y is the compactification of Y obtained by gluing in
standard disks. The second equation in (4.44) makes clear that dim MY ;h̄1 ,...,h̄k is
an even number. This is explained by the theorem of Mehta and Seshadri [MeS],
which identifies dim MY ;h̄1 ,...,h̄k as a complex manifold (of stable parabolic bundles)
when Y is endowed with a complex structure.30
   The passage from (4.43) to (4.44) and the map (4.35) are illuminated by the
exact cohomology sequence of the pair (Y, ∂Y ), modified using excision:
(4.45)
                           j                        δ           ◦            i         
0 −−−−→ H 0 Y ; g(η) −−−−→ H 0 ∂Y ; g(η) −−−−→ Hc1 Y ; g(η) −−−−→ H 1 Y ; g(η)
                                                                 
                 ∼                         ∼                     ∼
                 y=                         y=                     y=
                                j                               δ
0 −−−−→         Lie Zη      −−−−→       ⊕ Lie Zhi      −−−−→ Tη M′Y ;h1 ,...,hk
   29 I thank Frank Quinn for pointing out this proof. My original proof, based on Atiyah-Patodi-

Singer, was much less elementary.
   30 There is a recent gauge theoretic proof of the Mehta-Seshadri theorem by Jonathan Poritz [Po].

                                                41
We still assume that Y has no closed components. The formal tangent space
Tη MY ;h̄1 ,...,h̄k is the quotient of the formal tangent space Tη M′Y ;h1 ,...,hk by the
image of δ.
   Theorem 4.26 states that the bundle (4.30) descends to the quotient M′Y ;h1 ,...,hk .
In fact, this bundle also descends further to the moduli space MY ;h̄1 ,...,h̄k .
Proposition 4.46. The action of GQ;h1 ,...,hk on Aflat    Q;h1 ,...,hk lifts to the line bundle
LQ;h1 ,...,hk → Aflat
                 Q;h1 ,...,hk . The center Z ֒→ GQ;h1 ,...,hk acts trivially.

Proof. If g ∈ Zhi , then the change of basepoint gi → bi g changes the fiber Lη over
a connection η according to (4.9). The Wess-Zumino-Witten line Kg which enters
is canonically trivial (A.4) since g is constant, and this trivialization is compatible
with multiplication in Zhi . This gives a lift of the Zhi action to LQ;h1 ,...,hk , as
desired.
   An element of the center Z is represented as a constant map g : Y → G. Fix a
section q : Y → Q and let a = q ∗ η. Then the action of g on Lη is multiplication by
cY (a, g) (4.1), which is trivial. (We use the trivialization (A.4) here.)




                                              42
             §5 Hamiltonian Theory on Surfaces with Boundary
   As in §3 we use the Chern-Simons functional on paths of connections over a sur-
face, now possibly with boundary, to define a connection on a line bundle (4.30) over
the space of connections (Proposition 5.9). Rather than proceed by direct calcula-
tion, we use the abstract construction of a connection from its holonomy explained
in Appendix B. Just as the construction of the bundle depends on the choice of
trivializing section (4.24), so too does the connection.31 This line bundle with con-
nection descends to the moduli spaces M′Y ;h1 ,...,hk (4.33) and M∗Y ;h̄1 ,...,h̄k (4.37).
Because our constructions are local, these line bundles obey a gluing law (Proposi-
tion 5.29). The analogue of this gluing law in the quantum theory leads to a modular
functor [S], from which one obtains the Verlinde algebra [V]. For details in the case
of a finite gauge group, see [FQ]. One can twist the line bundle over M∗Y ;h̄1 ,...,h̄k by
representations of the centralizers of the boundary holonomies. These twisted line
bundles (5.31) are considered by Daskalopoulos and Wentworth [DasW]. They only
construct them for certain conjugacy classes of the fixed boundary holonomies, but
we find no such restriction on the holonomy.32
   Let Y be a compact oriented 2-manifold with parametrized boundary. Fix a
G bundle Q → Y . Now a path of connections and basepoints hηt , bt i on Q deter-
mines a connection η and a path b of basepoints on [0, 1] × Q. The connection η
has no dt component. Restricting to the boundary we obtain a unique map to the
universal bundle
                                                      ϕ
                                  [0, 1] × ∂Q −−−−→           R
                                                             
(5.1)                                                        
                                        y                     y
                                                      ϕ̄
                                  [0, 1] × ∂Y −−−−→ G × S 1

which restricted to a boundary component (∂Q)i and a fixed t satisfies ϕ∗ (θRhi (t) ) =
∂ηi (t) and preserves the basepoints. Here hi (t) is the holonomy around (∂Q)i . The
pullback of the universal connection is

(5.2)                                 ϕ∗ (θR ) = ∂η + ξdt

for some ξ : [0, 1]×∂Q → g. An easy argument shows that for fixed t the infinitesimal
gauge transformation ξt ∈ Ω0∂Y (gQ ) depends only on the first derivative hη̇ t , ḃt i
of hηt , bt i. So we have a function

(5.3)                   ξ : T (AQ × Qy1 × · · · × Qyk ) −→ Ω0∂Y (gQ ).

Now from (5.2) we compute the curvature of ϕ∗ (θR ) to be

                                        dt ∧ (∂ η̇ − dη ξ),

   31 We can also construct a connection on (4.29) where the boundary holonomies are allowed to

vary over a subset V ⊂ G on which the universal bundle is trivialized. Then the connection also
depends on a choice of universal connection (4.14). We omit that here, but return to it in Part 2
where we can make better sense of the dependence on these choices.
   32 If we did not include the 1-form (5.8) in our connection, then we would find their restriction.

                                                 43
where dη is the covariant derivative. On the other hand this curvature is the pull-
back of (4.15) under (5.1). In particular, if the boundary holonomies are constant
in t, then this curvature vanishes and

(5.4)                                             ∂ η̇ = dη ξ.

   Fix a subset V ⊂ G and a trivialization (4.24) of the universal bundle over V . (In
a moment we will fix the boundary holonomies.) Then for a path hηt , bt i ∈ AQ;V,...,V
with boundary holonomies in V we obtain from (5.1) a section

(5.5)                         r(η, b) : [0, 1] × ∂Y −→ [0, 1] × ∂Q.

These sections glue properly when we glue together paths. According to the con-
struction (4.25) and (4.3) of the lines (4.27), and the trivialization (A.4), the sec-
tion (5.5) induces an isometry

(5.6)                                    L[0,1]×∂Y ;∂η,b0 ,b1 ∼
                                                              =C

These isometries are compatible with gluing and gauge transformations.
  Now fix the boundary holonomies to be h1 , . . . , hk ∈ V . Then the pullback

(5.7)               a = r(η, b)∗ ∂η ∈ Ω1∂Y (g),                        hη, bi ∈ AQ;h1 ,...,hk ,

is independent of hη, bi. Define the 1-form α ∈ Ω1AQ;h ,...,h by
                                                                                1       k

                                                           Z
(5.8)                              α(η̇ , ḃ) = 2πi                 hξ(η̇ , ḃ) ∧ ai.
                                                               ∂Y

This 1-form enters in the following extension of Proposition 3.17.
Proposition 5.9. Fix a G bundle Q → Y over a compact oriented 2-manifold with
parametrized boundary ∂Y = ⊔ki=1 (∂Y )i . Choose also a universal connection (4.14)
and a trivialization (4.24) of the universal bundle over points h1 , . . . , hk ∈ G. Then
the Chern-Simons action, modified by the 1-form (5.8), defines a unitary connection
on the hermitian line bundle (4.30). The curvature of this connection times i/2π is
                                                       Z                            Z
(5.10)        ωhη,bi (η̇ 1 , ḃ1 ; η̇ 2 , ḃ2 ) = −2       hη̇1 ∧ η̇2 i + 2                 hξ1 ∧ dη ξ2 i,
                                                       Y                            ∂Y


where ξi = ξhη,bi (η̇ i , ḃi ) is defined by (5.3). The action of GQ on AQ;h1 ,...,hk lifts
to LQ;h1 ,...,hk , and the lifted action preserves the metric and connection. The in-
duced “moment map” is
                                                           Z
(5.11)                                 µξ (η) = 2               hΩ(η) ∧ ξi,
                                                           Y


where ξ ∈ Ω0Y (gQ ) is an infinitesimal gauge transformation.
We do not have a good geometric explanation of the “correction” 1-form (5.8). Even
if h·i is nondegenerate, the form ω is degenerate; the kernel consists of variations
                                                           44
where η̇ = 0 and ḃ is arbitrary. The “moment map” (5.11) is still well-defined as
the obstruction to descending the connection to the quotient by GQ .
   We remark that Chang [Ch] constructs a connection on a determinant line bundle
with similar formulas for the curvature and moment map.
   One can give a proof of Proposition 5.9 by calculations similar to those in the
proof of Proposition 3.17. For this one needs detailed geometry of the Wess-Zumino-
Witten line bundle, explained in Appendix A. We opt for an easier route, based on
the gluing law in Proposition 4.11 and the theorem in Appendix B which constructs
a connection from the parallel transport.
Proof. Let hηt , bt i be a smooth path in AQ;h1 ,...,hk . As above we obtain a con-
nection η on [0, 1] × Q → [0, 1] × Y . The boundary ∂(η) = η1 ⊔ η0 ⊔ ∂ηt is a
connection on Q ⊔ Q ⊔ [0, 1] × ∂Q → Y ⊔ −Y ⊔ −[0, 1] × ∂Y . Using the inverse of
the trivialization (5.6) we identify the Chern-Simons action on η as a map

(5.12)                   PT(ηt ) = e2πiS[0,1]×Y (η) : Lη0 ,b0 −→ Lη1 ,b1 .

PT(·) is a smooth function of the path, since the Chern-Simons action is smooth.
For constant paths (5.12) is the identity map, since then the connection η bounds
a connection on D2 × Y which is constant in the D2 factor. Furthermore, PT(·) is
reparametrization invariant by the functoriality property (2.22). The generalized
gluing law Proposition 4.11 and the gluing law for the trivializations (5.6) imply that
(5.12) composes properly when we glue paths; in the terminology of Appendix B,
it is an additive function. Hence the hypotheses of Corollary B.6 are satisfied,
and this theorem asserts the existence of a connection on LQ;h1 ,...,hk → AQ;h1 ,...,hk
with parallel transport (5.12).33 Notice that (B.3) is an explicit formula for the
connection form.
   However, this is not the connection we want. The connection on LQ;h1 ,...,hk we
consider is this connection plus the 1-form α defined in (5.8). We will now show that
the curvature and moment map of this modified connection are (5.10) and (5.11).
   To verify the curvature formula (5.10), fix x, y small and consider the connection

(5.13)                                   η + sxη̇1 + ty η̇2

on the bundle [0, 1]s ×[0, 1]t ×Q. Choose basepoints which agree with b at s = t = 0,
have derivative ḃ1 and ḃ2 along the s and t directions and have constant boundary
holonomies. Let
                         γx,y : ∂([0, 1] × [0, 1]) −→ AQ;h1 ,...,hk

be the resulting map on the boundary of the s, t rectangle. Then by the calculus
of differential forms we see that the curvature of the connection on LQ;h1 ,...,hk
evaluated in the directions hη̇ 1 , ḃ1 i, hη̇ 2 , ḃ2 i is

                        d      d
(5.14)             −                 log hol(γx,y ) + dα(η̇ 1 , ḃ1 ; η̇ 2 , ḃ2 ),
                       dx x=0 dy y=0

    33 Clearly this argument generalizes to an axiomatic framework, where one deduces the Hamil-

tonian theory (symplectic structure) from the general properties of the action. We will not attempt
this here (but see [Ax,§3]).
                                                  45
where hol(γx,y ) is the holonomy around the loop. Equation (5.12) defines this holo-
nomy as the exponential of 2πi times the Chern-Simons action, which we compute
using (2.8) applied to W = [0, 1] × [0, 1] × Y . Note

(5.15)              ∂W = ∂([0, 1] × [0, 1]) × Y ∪ [0, 1] × [0, 1] × ∂Y.

Now the curvature of (5.13) is

(5.16)                        Ω = Ωs,t + x ds ∧ η̇1 + y dt ∧ η̇2 ,

where Ωs,t is the curvature of (5.13) restricted to Y × {s} × {t}. A straightforward
computation shows
                     Z                              Z
(5.17)                            hΩ ∧ Ωi = −2xy hη̇1 ∧ η̇2 i.
                          [0,1]×[0,1]×Y                           Y


   It remains to calculate the action on [0, 1] × [0, 1] × ∂Y (c.f. (5.15)) and the
contribution from dα in (5.14). The definition (5.12) instructs us to use the trivi-
alization (5.6), and so to calculate the action on X = [0, 1] × [0, 1] × ∂Y relative to
the canonical section r on ∂X. In fact, we may as well use r over all of X. Consider
the connection (5.13) on [0, 1] × [0, 1] × ∂Q. (We now omit the ‘∂’ from the notation
for the connection.) As in (5.2) we have

                        r∗ (η + sxη̇1 + ty η̇2 ) = a − xξ1 ds − yξ2 dt,

where a, defined in (5.7), is independent of s and t, and ξ1 , ξ2 : X → g are defined
by (5.3). From (5.16) we see that

(5.18)                             r∗ (Ω) = xds ∧ η̇1 + ydt ∧ η̇2 .

The action relative to the trivialization r is computed from (1.26) and (2.2):
(5.19)                      Z                  Z
SX (r, η + sxη̇1 + ty η̇2 ) = xy                  ds∧dt        −hξ1 ∧ η̇2 i+ hξ2 ∧ η̇1 i+ h[ξ1 , ξ2 ]∧ai.
                                    [0,1]×[0,1]           ∂Y


Combining (5.17) and (5.19), substituting (5.4), and using Stokes’ theorem we see
that
                                        Z            Z                  Z
   i d       d
−                   log hol(γx,y ) = −2 hη̇1 ∧η̇2 i+     2hξ1 ∧dη ξ2 i−     h[ξ1 , ξ2 ]∧ai.
  2π dx x=0 dy y=0                       Y            ∂Y                 ∂Y

                        i
It is easy to see that 2π dα in (5.14) cancels the last term, thereby proving (5.10).
    Next, we verify (5.11). Suppose ξ ∈ Ω0Y (gQ ) and ψt ∈ GQ is a path of gauge
transformations with ψ0 = id and ψ̇0 = ξ. Consider the path hψt∗ η, ψt−1 bi ∈
AQ;h1 ,...,hk . Now the path ψt∗ η forms a connection η on [0, x] × Y . Fix a section
q : Y → Q which has ∂q = r(η, b), and let q : [0, x] × Y → [0, x] × Q be the
section ψt−1 q. According to (3.24) and (5.12) the moment map is

                             d                        i
(5.20)         µξ (η) = −      x=0
                                   S[0,x]×Y (q, η) −    α(dη ξ, ξ basepoints ).
                            dx                       2π
                                                    46
Now
                                        q∗ η = q ∗ η − ξdt,

from which the pullback of the curvature Ω of η is

                                    q∗ Ω = Ω + dt ∧ dη ξ,

where Ω = Ω(η) is the curvature of η. A short computation shows
                                  Z x     h Z              Z                                i
(5.21)        S[0,x]×Y (q, η) =         dt −2 hΩ ∧ ξ(t)i +                        hξ(t) ∧ ai .
                                   0               Y                         ∂Y


We deduce (5.11) easily from (5.20) and (5.21). This completes the proof of Propo-
sition 5.9.
Corollary 5.22. The line bundle with connection in Proposition 5.9 descends to
a line bundle with connection
                                                                                  
(5.23)              LY ;h1 ,...,hk −→ M′Y ;h1 ,...,hk = Aflat
                                                         Q;h1 ,...,hk                 GQ

over the moduli space (4.33). The curvature times i/2π is given by (5.10).
This follows directly from the fact that the “moment map” (5.11), which is the
obstruction to descending the connection, vanishes on the space Aflat   Q;h1 ,...,hk of flat
connections. The quotient line bundle with connection is independent of Q up to
canonical diffeomorphism.
   We next show that this connection descends to MY ;h̄1 ,...,h̄k , the moduli space of
flat connections whose boundary holonomies are conjugate to the hi (cf. (4.34)), at
least over the irreducible connections.
Proposition 5.24. The lift of GQ;h1 ,...,hk to LQ;h1 ,...,hk → Aflat
                                                                Q;h1 ,...,hk , defined in
Proposition 4.46, is parallel with respect to the connection on LQ;h1 ,...,hk defined in
Proposition 5.9 and preserves that connection as well.
Proof. By Proposition 5.9 we need only consider the action of the subgroup Zh (4.36).
An easy argument shows that it preserves the holonomy along paths, hence pre-
serves the connection, so we need only check that the action is parallel.
   Suppose hη, bi ∈ AQ;h1 ,...,hk . Fix a section q : Y → Q such that ∂q = r(η, b).
Now let λ ∈ Lie(Zhi ) for some fixed i, and consider the path gt = etλ ∈ Zhi . Recall
that Zhi is connected, so every element can be written eλ for some λ. Acting
on hη, bi we obtain the path

(5.25)                         t 7−→ hη; b1 , . . . , bi gt , . . . , bk i

in AQ;h1 ,...,hk . The connection on [0, 1] × Q it is independent of the first factor,
but the basepoint on the ith boundary component varies. Now the constant section
q : [0, 1] × Y → [0, 1] × Q does not induce the (inverse) trivialization (5.6) on [0, 1] ×
(∂Y )i , as required by (5.12). Instead, we need to use the section qgt . Note that
e2πiW[0,1]×(∂Y )i (gt ) induces the trivialization (A.4) of Kgt on the boundary. Hence
                                                  47
the parallel transport (5.12) of the lift of (5.25) to LQ;h1 ,...,hk , computed relative to
the trivialization of LQ;h1 ,...,hk induced by q, is (cf. (4.1))
                                                                          
         c−[0,1]×(∂Y )i (r∗ (∂η), gt ) = c[0,1]×(∂Y )i (rgt )∗ (∂η), gt−1
                                                     Z 1 Z                             
                                       = exp −2πi        dt         hAdgt a ∧ gt−1 ġt i
                                                           0      (∂Y )i
                                               Z 1Z                           
                                     = exp −2πi                         ha ∧ λi .
                                                           0   (∂Y )i


This is canceled by the correction 1-form (5.8).
    The space A∗,flat
                 Q;h1 ,...,hk of irreducible flat connections is a manifold, and GQ;h1 ,...,hk acts
with constant stabilizer Z (cf. the discussion following (4.32)). Since Z acts triv-
ially on the line bundle LQ;h1 ,...,hk → A∗,flat
                                               Q;h1 ,...,hk by Proposition 4.46, it follows from
Proposition 5.24 that this line bundle with connection descends to a line bundle
with connection

(5.26)                          LY ;h̄1 ,...,h̄k −→ M∗Y ;h̄1 ,...,h̄k

over the moduli space of irreducible flat connections with boundary holonomies
conjugate to the hi .
Proposition 5.27. If h·i is a nondegenerate form on g, then the curvature of (5.26)
is a symplectic form on M∗Y ;h̄1 ,...,h̄k .
Proof. By Lemma 4.40 we can realize tangent vectors at η to M∗Y ;h̄1 ,...,h̄k by com-
pactly supported forms η̇, and evaluated on two such forms the curvature (5.10)
is
                                               Z
(5.28)                     ωη (η̇1 , η̇2 ) = −2 hη̇1 ∧ η̇2 i.
                                                       Y


If h·i is nondegenerate, then Poincaré duality (for twisted coefficients) implies that
ωη induces a nondegenerate pairing
                                ◦                     
                            Hc1 Y ; g(η) ⊗ H 1 Y ; g(η) −→ R;

here we do not require that η̇2 in (5.28) have compact support. The exact se-
                                                                                 ◦       
quence (4.45) implies that ωη is also nondegenerate as a bilinear pairing on Hc1 Y ; g(η) / im δ ∼
                                                                                                 =
Tη M∗Y ;h̄1 ,...,h̄k .
   As with all of our constructions there is a gluing law for the connection con-
structed in Proposition 5.9. One consequence of the basepoints, which rigidify the
connection over the boundary, is that gluing is well-defined for the pointed moduli
space (5.23). It is not, however, well-defined once we remove the basepoint (5.26).
Proposition 5.29. Suppose Q → Y is a G bundle over a compact oriented 2-
manifold with parametrized boundary. Fix boundary holonomies, which we collec-
tively denote h∂Y . Now suppose S ֒→ Y is a closed oriented codimension one
                                                 48
submanifold, and Qcut → Y cut the cut bundle. Fix holonomies hS for the compo-
nents of S, and denote by h−S their inverses. Then (4.8) leads to a diagram of
maps

                           LQcut ;h∂Y ,hS ,h−S −−−−→ LQ;h∂Y
                                                      
                                                      
(5.30)                             y                   y
                          M′Y cut ;h∂Y ,hS ,h−S −−−−→ M′Y ;h∂Y

which is compatible with the connection constructed in Corollary 5.22.
There is a corresponding gluing law for the connection in Proposition 5.9; it is
proved using the gluing law Proposition 4.11 for the action and the definition (5.12),
(5.8) of the connection. Then (5.30) is the quotient by GQ .
   We also remark that this connection is compatible with change of gauge group,
as in Proposition 2.9 and Proposition 2.29. However, we must be careful to use
compatible trivializations of the universal bundles of connections over the circle.
   Finally, we construct twistings of the line bundle (5.26). Recall that the map (4.35),
restricted to the subspace of irreducible connections, is a principal bundle with
structure group Zh /Z, where Zh is defined in (4.36). Suppose

                                       λ : Zh /Z 7−→ T

is a unitary representation. Then there is an induced hermitian line bundle34

                                    Lλ −→ M∗Y ;h̄1 ,...,h̄k .

In the quantum Chern-Simons theory one considers the tensor product bundles

(5.31)                      LY ;h̄1 ,...,h̄k ⊗ Lλ −→ M∗Y ;h̄1 ,...,h̄k

for various λ. We do not find a relationship between the holonomies hi and the
representation λ, as was found in [DasW,§5].




   34 We did not succeed in finding a unitary connection on L . Perhaps one should be induced
                                                              λ
from a connection on (4.35), but we did not find a connection there either.
                                               49
                                 §6 Special Cases
    We first note some special features of the Hamiltonian theory (§3) on surfaces of
genus 0 and genus 1. We also state the usual formula (6.3) for the Chern-Simons
functional when G = SU (2).
    The 2-sphere Y = S 2 is simply connected, so according to Proposition 3.5 the
moduli space MY consists of a single point. Of course, the dimension formula (3.9)
predicts that dim MY = 0. The line corresponding to a trivial connection is canon-
ically trivial (over any surface).
    If Y = S 1 × S 1 is a torus, then π1 (S 1 × S 1 , ∗) ∼
                                                        = Z × Z for the standard base-
point ∗ ∈ S 1 × S 1 . Hence Hom π1 (S 1 × S 1 , ∗), G is given by the set of commuting
pairs of elements g1 , g2 ∈ G. We can simultaneously conjugate both elements into
a fixed maximal torus T ⊂ G, since they commute. Then the normalizer N (T ) acts
by conjugation on pairs of elements in T , with T ⊂ N (T ) acting trivially. Thus the
quotient Weyl group W = N (T )/T acts, and
                                                      
(6.1)                           MS 1 ×S 1 ≈ T × T         W.

Note that for a generic connection η on the torus the centralizer Zη is isomorphic to
the maximal torus T . If the holonomies are both singular elements of G, then the
centralizer is bigger. Thus the W action degenerates at pairs of singular points of G
(fixed by the same element of W ). Away from these singular points (3.9) predicts
the proper formula for the dimension of (6.1).
   We now specialize to G = SU2 . Fix the standard maximal torus T of diagonal
matrices. The nontrivial element of the Weyl group W ∼       = Z/2Z acts on T by
permuting the elements in a diagonal matrix. The fixed points are 1, −1 ∈ T , so
there are four singular points in (6.1).
   The integral forms on g = su2 are parametrized by an integer k:

                                        k
(6.2)                  ha ⊗ bi = −          Tr(ab),       a, b ∈ su2 .
                                       8π 2

Then the Chern-Simons functional (2.2) takes the form
                                       Z
                                 k                   2
(6.3)              SX (A) = −             Tr(A ∧ dA + A ∧ A ∧ A),
                                8π 2    X            3

where A ∈ Ω3X (su2 ) is the connection form relative to some trivialization.




                                             50
         §A Appendix: Classical Wess-Zumino-Witten Theory35
   The Wess-Zumino-Witten functional (2.13) is the action of a 1 + 1 dimensional
topological classical field theory. It arises in the Chern-Simons theory as a term
in the cocycle which measures the dependence of the Chern-Simons action on the
boundary trivialization. In this appendix we briefly study it as a field theory in its
own right. In fact, it is simpler than the Chern-Simons theory and is a nice first
example of the geometry of classical field theory. Our main interest, however, is in
the metrized lines Kγ attached to loops γ : S 1 → G, which together form a central
extension of the loop group. We restrict ourselves to connected, simply connected,
compact Lie groups G endowed with an integral bilinear form h·i : g ⊗ g → R on
the Lie algebra. There is a theory for arbitrary compact G endowed with a class
in H 3 (G); this can be constructed using the techniques of Part 2 (cf. [Ga]). Our
constructions of the lines here is quite simple, based on the fact that every field
on a “space” is the boundary of a field on some “spacetime”. This procedure is
elaborated in [Ax,§4] in a more general context.
   For Y a closed oriented 2-manifold, equation (2.13) defines a function WY (g) on
the space of (piecewise) smooth maps g : Y → G; this is the content of Lemma 2.12.
To generalize to 2-manifolds with boundary, we must construct lines attached to
the boundary fields.
Proposition A.1. Let S be a closed oriented 1-manifold (union of circles). Then
for each smooth map γ : S → G there is attached a metrized complex line Kγ =
KS,γ . The assignment γ 7→ Kγ is smooth; satisfies functoriality, orientation, and
additivity conditions analogous to (2.21), (2.23), and (2.25); and for γ1 , γ2 : S → G
with pointwise product γ1 γ2 there is an isometry

(A.2)                             Kγ1 ⊗ Kγ2 −→ Kγ1 γ2 .

Furthermore, for three loops γ1 , γ2 , γ3 we have the commutative diagram

                        Kγ1 ⊗ Kγ2 ⊗ Kγ3 −−−−→ Kγ1 ⊗ Kγ2 γ3
                                                  
                                                  
(A.3)                          y                   y
                           K γ1 γ2 ⊗ K γ3     −−−−→        K γ1 γ2 γ3

Finally, if γ is a constant loop then there is a trivialization

(A.4)                                       Kγ ∼
                                               =C

which respects (A.2).
It follows from (A.2) and (A.3) that the set of elements of unit norm in the lines Kγ
                 \G) which is a central extension of the loop group:
form a group Map(S,

(A.5)                    →T−
                        1−    \G) −
                           → Map(S, → Map(S, G) −
                                                → 1.

This construction of the central extension first appeared in Mickelsson [M]. The last
assertion means that this central extension is split over the constant loops. The
  35 I thank Jacek Brodzki for discussions about material in this section.

                                               51
functoriality means that the group of orientation preserving diffeomorphisms Diff + (S)
           \G). For more on this central extension, see [PS,§4].
acts on Map(S,
Proof. We only sketch the constructions. Fix an oriented 2-manifold D with ∂D =
S. Let Cγ be the category of extensions Γ : D → G of γ : S → G; it is nonempty by
our assumptions on the topology of G. Endow Cγ with a unique morphism between
any two objects. Define a functor Fγ : Cγ → L by Fγ (Γ) = C and Fγ (Γ0 → Γ1 ) is
multiplication by
                                                     
(A.6)                     exp 2πiWDdouble (Γ0 ∪ −Γ1 ) .

Here Ddouble is the double of D and Γ0 ∪ −Γ1 is the (piecewise smooth) map which
is Γ0 on one copy of D and Γ1 on the other, with the indicated orientations. It is
easy to check that Fγ is a functor; its invariant sections form the line Kγ .
   To construct the isometry (A.2) fix extensions Γ1 , Γ2 of γ1 , γ2 . Then Γ1 Γ2 is
an extension of γ1 γ2 . These extensions trivialize the lines in (A.2), and relative to
these trivializations the isometry (A.2) is multiplication by
                     Z                                 Z
                                                                              
(A.7)       exp 2πi hΓ1 θ ∧ AdΓ2 Γ2 θi = exp 2πi hΓ−1
                           ∗          ∗                                    −1
                                                             1 dΓ1 ∧ dΓ2 Γ2 i ,
                      D                                      D

where θ is the Maurer-Cartan form on G. This calculation proceeds from the
following formula. For any 3-manifold X and g : X → G a smooth map, we set

                  1                             1
          ω(g) = − hg ∗ θ ∧ [g ∗ θ ∧ g ∗ θ]i = − hg −1 dg ∧ [g −1 dg ∧ g −1 dg]i,
                  6                             6
the Wess-Zumino-Witten lagrangian. Then for g1 , g2 : X → G we have

(A.8)                     ω(g1 g2 ) = ω(g1 ) + ω(g2 ) + dσ(g1 , g2 ),

where
                σ(g1 , g2 ) = dhg1∗ θ ∧ Adg2 g2∗ θi = dhg1−1 dg1 ∧ dg2 g2−1 i.
    For the functoriality, suppose f : S ′ → S is a diffeomorphism, γ : S → G a map,
and γ ′ = γ ◦ f . Then an extension Γ : D → G gives a trivialization Kγ ∼   = C. Let
D′ be the 2-manifold D′ = S ′ ∪f D. Then ∂D′ = S ′ and γ ′ extends to a map
Γ′ : D′ → G which agrees with Γ on D. Now Γ′ gives a trivialization Kγ ′ ∼      = C.
Relative to these trivializations we define f ∗ : Kγ → Kγ ′ to be the identity.
    The trivialization for constant γ comes from the constant extension Γ.
Proposition A.9. Let Y be a compact oriented 2-manifold with boundary and
g : Y → G a (piecewise) smooth map. Then the action

                                    e2πiWY (g) ∈ K∂Y,∂g

is defined and satisfies functoriality, orientation, additivity, and gluing conditions
analogous to (2.22), (2.24), (2.26), and (2.27). In addition, if g1 , g2 : Y → G with
pointwise product g1 g2 , then
                                    Z
(A.10)     e2πiWY (g1 g2 ) = exp(2πi hg1∗ θ ∧ Adg2 g2∗ θi) e2πiWY (g1 ) ⊗ e2πiWY (g2 ) .
                                        Y
                                              52
To compute the action we choose an oriented 2-manifold D with ∂D = ∂Y and
extend γ = ∂g to Γ : D → G. Then we apply formula (2.13) to g∪−Γ : Y ∪−D → G.
The dependence on the extension transforms by the cocycle (A.6).
   One consequence of (A.10) is
                                         −1
                             e2πiWY (g        )
                                                  = e2πiW−Y (g) .

  We record here the differential of the Wess-Zumino-Witten functional. For
any manifold M we identify the tangent space to Map(M, G) at any point with
Map(M, g) = Ω0M (g) via left translation.
Proposition A.11. Let Y be a closed oriented 2-manifold. Suppose g : Y → G
and Ξ ∈ Ω0Y (g). Set Φ = g ∗ θ ∈ Ω1Y (g), where θ is the Maurer-Cartan form on G.
Then
                                            Z
(A.12)                      d(WY )g (Ξ) =     hΞ ∧ dΦi.
                                                       Y

If Y has nonempty boundary, then the same formula serves to compute the co-
variant derivative of the action (relative to some trivialization) with respect to the
connection defined below.
Proof. Let X be an oriented 3-manifold with ∂X = Y . We extend g, Φ, Ξ over X
without introducing new notation. Let Γt be a path of maps X → G with Γ−1 Γ̇ = Ξ,
where we use the Leibnitz notation for the derivative at t = 0. Set Φt = Γ∗t θ. Then
we calculate
                                         1
                                 dΦ = − [Φ ∧ Φ]
(A.13)                                   2
                                 dΞ = Φ̇ + [Ξ ∧ Φ].

Now the Wess-Zumino-Witten lagrangian is
                           1               1
                          − hΦ ∧ [Φ ∧ Φ]i = hΦ ∧ dΦi.
                           6               3
Some calculation with (A.13) shows

                          d      1
                                   hΦ ∧ dΦi = dhΞ ∧ dΦi,
                          dt t=0 3
and then (A.12) follows by Stokes’ theorem.
  The analogue of Proposition 3.17 is the following.
Proposition A.14. Fix a closed oriented 1-manifold S. Then the Wess-Zumino-
Witten action defines a unitary connection α on the hermitian line bundle K →
Map(S, G). The curvature of α times i/2π is
                                 Z
(A.15)          τγ (ξ1 , ξ2 ) = − h[ξ1 , ξ2 ] ∧ φi, ξ1 , ξ2 ∈ Ω0S (g),
                                 S

            ∗
where φ = γ θ is the pullback of the Maurer-Cartan form by γ : S → G. The central
            \G) acts on K by both left and right multiplication. The action of
extension Map(S,
                                                  53
the center preserves the connection α. Left multiplication by γ0 : S → G changes α
by the 1-form
                                       Z
(A.16)                     λγ (ξ) = 2πi hγ0∗ θ ∧ Adγ ξi.
                                              S

Right multiplication by γ0 : S → G changes α by the 1-form
                                        Z
(A.17)                      ργ (ξ) = 2πi hξ ∧ Adγ0 γ0∗ θi.
                                              S


Note that since the center of Map(S,\G) preserves α, the action of an element in
   \G) depends only on its image in Map(S, G). Formulas (A.16) and (A.17)
Map(S,
give the difference between the pullback of α and α. Also, the curvature (A.15) is
the transgression of − 61 hθ ∧ [θ ∧ θ]i ∈ Ω3G to Map(S, G).
Proof. We use ‘α’ to denote both the connection (a 1-form on the circle bundle of
unit vectors in K) and its local expression on Map(S, G) relative to a trivialization.
We suppose that for each γ : S → G in some open set in the loop group we are given
a smoothly varying extension Γ : D → G, where ∂D = S, and so a trivialization
of K over that subset. Note that these extensions determine extensions of tangent
vectors as well. Now if γt is a path in this subset, and γ : [0, 1]×S → G the resulting
map, then36
                                            Z 1         Z
(A.18)                   W[0,1]×S (γ) = −          dt       hΓ−1 Γ̇ ∧ dΦi,
                                              0         D

where Φ = Γ∗t θ is the pullback of the Maurer-Cartan form by the extension Γt of γt .
Consider the (connection) 1-form37
                            Z
(A.19)         αγ (ξ) = 2πi hΞ ∧ dΦi,        γ : S → G, ξ ∈ Ω0S (g),
                                D

where Γ : D → G and Ξ ∈ Ω0D (g) are the given extensions of γ and ξ, and Φ = Γ∗ θ.
If Γ̃ is a different extension of γ, and it induces the extension Ξ̃ of ξ, then the
trivialization of K changes by the inverse of the cocycle (A.6). The logarithmic
differential of this cocycle is computed by (A.12) as
                                Z               Z
                         −2πi hΞ̃ ∧ dΦ̃i + 2πi hΞ ∧ dΦi,
                                  D                          D

which is precisely −(α̃ − α), minus the difference of the connection forms relative to
the two trivializations. This consistency shows that α defines a unitary connection
on K → Map(S, G).
   36 The sign in (A.18) caused the author great confusion. It is simply explained by the obser-

vation
                       ∂(−[0, 1] × D) = −{1} × D ∪ {0} × D ∪ [0, 1] × S.

    37 Recall that parallel transport is the integral of minus the connection form relative to a

trivialization.
                                              54
  Now if ξ1 , ξ2 ∈ Ω0S (g) with extensions Ξ1 , Ξ2 ∈ Ω0D (g), then the derivative of
hΞ2 ∧ dΦi in the direction Ξ1 is

                        hΞ2 ∧ dΦ̇i = hΞ2 ∧ −d[Ξ1 , Φ]i
                                   = h[dΞ1 , Ξ2 ] ∧ Φi + h[Ξ1 , Ξ2 ] ∧ dΦi

by (A.13). Hence the curvature times i/2π is
                        Z
 i                                                                                                       
   dαγ (ξ1 , ξ2 ) = −        h[dΞ1 , Ξ2 ] ∧ Φi + h[Ξ1 , Ξ2 ] ∧ dΦi − h[dΞ2 , Ξ1 ] ∧ Φi + h[Ξ2 , Ξ1 ] ∧ dΦi − h[Ξ1 , Ξ2 ] ∧ dΦi
2π
                        ZD
                =−    h[dΞ1 , Ξ2 ] ∧ Φi + h[Ξ1 , dΞ2 ] ∧ Φi + h[Ξ1 , Ξ2 ] ∧ dΦi
                   ZD
                = − h[ξ1 , ξ2 ] ∧ φi.
                         S

   The assertion about the action of the center is one of the defining properties of
a connection form on a circle bundle—it is invariant under the T action. Formu-
las (A.16) and (A.17) follow most easily by computing the parallel transport (A.18)
along γ0 γ and γγ0 , using (A.10). Alternatively, compute directly with (A.19), but
include a factor (A.7) for the identification of tensor products.




                                               55
               §B Appendix: Functions of paths and 1-forms
    Let N be a smooth manifold, possibly infinite dimensional, and P(N ) the space
of smooth parametrized paths ℓ : [0, 1] → N . Then P(N ) is also a smooth manifold;
a tangent to a path ℓ is a vector field v(t) ∈ Tℓ(t) N along ℓ. A function g : P(N ) → R
                                                                               
is invariant under reparametrization if g(ℓ̃) = g(ℓ), where ℓ̃(t) = ℓ s(t) for some
diffeomorphism s : [0, 1] → [0, 1] which fixes the endpoints. Suppose g is such a
function, ℓ is any path, and ti are chosen with 0 = t0 ≤ t1 ≤ · · · ≤ tM = 1. Let
ℓi = ℓ [ti−1 ,ti ] . Then we call g additive if
                                                 M
                                                 X
                                        g(ℓ) =         g(ℓi ),
                                                 i=1

where g(ℓi ) makes sense as g is invariant under reparametrization. A point path is
a constant function ℓ : [0, 1] → N .
Proposition B.1. Suppose g : P(N ) → R is a smooth function such that: (i)
g vanishes on point paths; (ii) g is invariant under reparametrization; and (iii) g is
additive. Then there is a smooth 1-form θ on N such that
                                             Z
(B.2)                                 g(ℓ) = θ.
                                                       ℓ

Proof. Let π : T N → N be the projection, and define the linear inclusion
                                   i : T N −→ T P(N )
                                           v 7−→ (t 7→ tv),
where t 7→ tv is a tangent vector to the constant path at π(v). Now set
                                                
(B.3)                             θ(v) = dg i(v) .
Since g is smooth, so is θ; and θ is linear since i and dg are. Hence θ is a smooth
1-form on N . Fix a path ℓ and a large integer M . Set ℓi = ℓ [ i−1 , i ] . Then by
                                                                   M  M
additivity,
                                                 M
                                                 X
(B.4)                                   g(ℓ) =         g(ℓi ).
                                                 i=1

Reparametrize ℓi by
                                        t+i−1
                         ℓi (t) = ℓ(          ),             0 ≤ t ≤ 1,
                                          M
and set
                                    ǫt + i − 1
                         ℓǫi (t) = ℓ(          ),     0 ≤ t ≤ 1.
                                        M
Then ǫ 7→ ℓǫ , 0 ≤ ǫ ≤ 1, is a smooth path in P(N ) from the point path at ℓ( i−1M )
                                                    t    i−1
to ℓi . The tangent to this path at ǫ = 0 is t 7→ M ℓ̇( M ). By Taylor’s theorem and
the definition (B.3) of θ,
                                    1        i−1          1
(B.5)                      g(ℓi ) =    θ ℓ̇(      ) + O( 2 ).
                                    M         M           M
Finally, combine (B.4) and (B.5) and take M → ∞ to obtain (B.2).
                                                 56
Corollary B.6. Let L → M be a smooth hermitian line bundle. Suppose that for
each path ℓ̄ ∈ P(M ) there is given an isometry

(B.7)                          PT(ℓ) : Lℓ̄(0) −→ Lℓ̄(1)

depending smoothly on ℓ such that: (i) PT is the identity map on point paths; (ii)
PT is invariant under reparametrization; and (iii) PT is additive. Then there is a
unitary connection on L for which PT is the parallel transport.
Proof. Let N ⊂ L be the vectors of unit norm. Then N → M is a circle bundle.
If ℓ ∈ P(N ) is a smooth path in N , then its projection ℓ̄ is a smooth path in M .
Using the parallel transport (B.7) we find an element PT(ℓ̄)ℓ(0) ∈ Lℓ̄(1) of unit
norm. Hence it differs from ℓ(1) by an element h(ℓ) ∈ C of unit norm:

(B.8)                         ℓ(1) = PT(ℓ̄)ℓ(0) · h(ℓ),

where the multiplication · occurs in the fiber Lℓ̄(1) . In other words, h determines a
smooth function
                                  h : P(N ) −→ T
into the unit complex numbers. The hypotheses imply: (i) h ≡ 1 on point paths;
(ii) h is invariant under reparametrization; and (iii) h is additive. In addition, we
claim that h has a logarithm; that is, there exists a function g : P(N ) → iR with
h(ℓ) = eg(ℓ) . This is because P(N ) retracts onto the space of constant paths and
h ≡ 1 on constant paths. Therefore, by Proposition B.1 there exists a smooth
(imaginary) 1-form θ on N such that
                                              R
                                    h(ℓ) = e ℓ θ .

From (B.8) it is obvious that the restriction of θ to a fiber of the circle bundle
N → M is the standard Maurer-Cartan form on the circle. Similarly, from (B.8)
we see that h is invariant under the circle action on N , whence θ is also. Therefore,
θ is a connection on N and (B.7) is the associated parallel transport.




                                         57
                                       References
[A]    M. F. Atiyah, Topological quantum field theory, Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes Etudes Sci.
       (Paris) 68 (1989), 175–186.
[AB]   M. F. Atiyah, R. Bott, The Yang-Mills equations over Riemann surfaces, Philos. Trans.
       Roy. Soc. London Ser. A 308 (1983), 523–615.
[Ar]   V. I. Arnold, Mathematical Methods of Classical Mechanics, Second Edition, Springer-
       Verlag, New York, 1989.
[Ax]   S. Axelrod, Geometric quantization of Chern-Simons gauge theory, Princeton thesis
       (1991).
[BTau] R. Bott, C. Taubes, On the rigidity theorems of Witten, Jour. Amer. Math Soc. 2 (1989),
       137–186.
[BT]   R. Bott, L. W. Tu, Differential Forms in Algebraic Topology, Springer-Verlag, New York,
       1982.
[Ch]   S. X.-D. Chang, Determinant line bundles and Riemann surfaces with boundaries (preprint).
[CS]   S. S. Chern, J. Simons, Characteristic forms and geometric invariants, Ann. Math. 99
       (1974), 48–69.
[CF]   P. E. Conner, E. E. Floyd, The Relationship of Cobordism to K-Theories, Lecture Notes
       in Mathematics, vol. 28, Springer-Verlag, 1966.
[DasW] G. Daskalopoulos, R. Wentworth, Geometric quantization for the moduli space of vector
       bundles with parabolic structure (preprint).
[DW]   R. Dijkgraaf, E. Witten, Topological gauge theories and group cohomology, Commun.
       Math. Phys. 129 (1990), 393–429.
[Fey]  R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, M. Sands, The Feynman Lectures on Physics, Volume 2,
       Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts, 1964.
[F1]   D. S. Freed, Higher line bundles (in preparation).
[F2]   D. S. Freed, Classical Chern-Simons theory, Part 2 (in preparation).
[FQ]   D. S. Freed, F. Quinn, Chern-Simons theory with finite gauge group, Commun. Math.
       Phys. (to appear).
[G]    W. M. Goldman, The symplectic nature of fundamental groups of surfaces, Adv. in Math.
       54 (1984), 200–225.
[Ga]   K. Gawȩdzki, Topological actions in two-dimensional quantum field theories, ??? (G. ’t
       Hooft et. al., eds.), Plenum Press, 1988, pp. 101–141.
[GS]   V. Guillemin, S. Sternberg, Symplectic Techniques in Physics, Cambridge University
       Press, New York, 1984.
[JW]   L. C. Jeffrey, J. Weitsman, Bohr-Sommerfeld orbits in the moduli space of flat connections
       and the Verlinde dimension formula (preprint).
[MeS] V. Mehta, C. Seshadri, Moduli of vector bundles on curves with parabolic structures,
       math. Ann 248 (1980), 205–239.
[M]    J. Mickelsson, Kac-Moody groups and the Dirac determinant line bundle, Topological
       and geometrical methods in field theory (Espoo, 1986), World Sci. Publishing, Teaneck,
       NJ, 1986.
[MS]   G. Moore, N. Seiberg, Taming the conformal zoo, Physics Letters B 220 (1989), 422–30.
[NS]   M. S. Narasimhan, C. S. Seshadri, Stable and unitary vector bundles on compact Riemann
       surfaces, Ann. Math. 65 (1965), 540–67.
[Po]   J. A. Poritz, The moduli space of stable vector bundles on a punctured Riemann surface
       (in preparation).
[PS]   A. Pressley, G. Segal, Loop Groups, Oxford University Press, New York, 1986.
[RSW] T. R. Ramadas, I. M. Singer, J. Weitsman, Some comments on Chern-Simons gauge
       theory, Commun. Math. Phys. 126 (1989), 409.
[S]    G. Segal, The definition of conformal field theory (preprint).
[V]    E. Verlinde, Fusion rules and modular transformations in 2d conformal field theory, Nucl.
       Phys. B 300 (1988), 360.
[Wal]  K. Walker, On Witten’s 3-manifold invariants (preprint).
[W]    E. Witten, Quantum field theory and the Jones polynomial, Commun. Math. Phys. 121
       (1989), 351–399.

      Department of Mathematics, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712
      E-mail address: dafr@math.utexas.edu
                                              58
